Armenia
Armenia,[c] officially the Republic of Armenia,[d] is a
landlocked country in the Armenian Highlands of West                     Republic of Armenia
Asia.[10][11] It is a part of the Caucasus region and is bordered          Հայաստանի
by Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north and Azerbaijan to        Հանրապետություն (Armenian)
the east, and Iran and the Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhchivan to               Hayastani Hanrapetut'yun
the south.[12] Yerevan is the capital, largest city and financial
center.

Armenia is a unitary, multi-party, democratic nation-state with
an ancient cultural heritage. The Armenian Highlands has been                  Flag
                                                                                                   Coat of arms
home to the Hayasa-Azzi, Shupria and Nairi. By at least 600
BC, an archaic form of Proto-Armenian, an Indo-European                       Anthem: Մեր Հայրենիք
language, had diffused into the Armenian Highlands.[13][14]                         Mer Hayrenik
                                                                                  "Our Fatherland"
The first Armenian state of Urartu was established in 860 BC,
and by the 6th century BC it was replaced by the Satrapy of                      0:00 / 0:00
Armenia. The Kingdom of Armenia reached its height under
Tigranes the Great in the 1st century BC and in the year 301
became the first state in the world to adopt Christianity as its
official religion.[15][16][17][e] Armenia still recognises the
Armenian Apostolic Church, the world's oldest national
church, as the country's primary religious establishment.[18][f]
The ancient Armenian kingdom was split between the
Byzantine and Sasanian Empires around the early 5th century.
Under the Bagratuni dynasty, the Bagratid Kingdom of
Armenia was restored in the 9th century before falling in 1045.
Cilician Armenia, an Armenian principality and later a
kingdom, was located on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea
between the 11th and 14th centuries.
                                                                                  Location of Armenia
Between the 16th and 19th centuries, the traditional Armenian       Capital                     Yerevan
homeland composed of Eastern Armenia and Western Armenia            and largest city            40°11′N 44°31′E
came under the rule of the Ottoman and Persian empires,             Official languages          Armenian[1]
repeatedly ruled by either of the two over the centuries. By the    Recognized languages        List:[2][b]
19th century, Eastern Armenia had been conquered by the
                                                                                                Assyrian
Russian Empire, while most of the western parts of the
                                                                                                German
traditional Armenian homeland remained under Ottoman rule.
                                                                                                Greek
During World War I, up to 1.5 million Armenians living in their
                                                                                                Kurdish[a]
ancestral lands in the Ottoman Empire were systematically
                                                                                                Russian
exterminated in the Armenian genocide. In 1918, following the
                                                                                                Ukrainian
Russian Revolution, all non-Russian countries declared their
independence after the Russian Empire ceased to exist, leading      Official script             Armenian
                                                                                                alphabet
to the establishment of the First Republic of Armenia. By 1920,
the state was incorporated into the Soviet Union as the
Armenian SSR. The modern Republic of Armenia became                  Ethnic groups (2022)[3]   98.1% Armenians
independent in 1991 during the dissolution of the Soviet                                       1.1% Yazidis
Union.                                                                                         0.8% other

Armenia is a developing country and ranks 85th on the Human          Religion (2022)[3]        96.8% Christianity
Development Index (2021).[8] Its economy is primarily based                                        95.2%
                                                                                                  Armenian
on industrial output and mineral extraction. While Armenia is                                     Apostolic
geographically located in the South Caucasus, it is generally                                     Church
considered geopolitically European. Since Armenia aligns                                           1.6% other
itself in many respects geopolitically with Europe, the country                                   Christian
is a member of numerous European organizations including the                                   0.6% no religion
Organization for Security and Co-Operation in Europe, the                                      0.9% other
Council of Europe, the Eastern Partnership, Eurocontrol, the                                   1.7% unspecified
Assembly of European Regions, and the European Bank for              Demonym(s)                Armenian
Reconstruction and Development. Armenia is also a member of
                                                                     Government                Unitary
certain regional groups throughout Eurasia, including the Asian                                parliamentary
Development Bank, the Collective Security Treaty                                               republic
Organization,[g] the Eurasian Economic Union, and the                • President               Vahagn
Eurasian Development Bank. Armenia supported the once de                                       Khachaturyan
facto independent Republic of Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh),            • Prime Minister          Nikol Pashinyan
which was proclaimed in 1991 on territory internationally            • President of the        Alen Simonyan
recognized as part of Azerbaijan, until the republic's                 National Assembly
dissolution in September 2023.                                       Legislature               National
                                                                                               Assembly

                                                                     Establishment
Etymology                                                            • Urartu                  860 BC–
                                                                                               547/90 BC
The original native Armenian name for the country was Հայք           • Kingdom of Armenia      331 BC–428 AD
([[[wikt:Հայք|Hayk’]]] Error: {{Lang}}: Non-latn text/Latn           • Bagratid Armenia        880s–1045
script subtag mismatch (help)); however, it is currently rarely      • Armenian Kingdom of     1198/99–1375
                                                                       Cilicia
used. The contemporary name Հայաստան (Hayastan)
                                                                     • Zakarid Armenia         1201–1350
became popular in the Middle Ages by addition of the Persian
                                                                     • Republic of Armenia     28 May 1918
suffix -stan (place).[19] However the origins of the name            • Red Army invasion       29 November
Hayastan trace back to much earlier dates and were first                                       1920
attested in c. 5th century in the works of Agathangelos,[20][21]     • Restoration of          23 September
Faustus of Byzantium,[22][23] Ghazar Parpetsi,[24] Koryun,[25]         independence            1991
and Sebeos.[26]                                                      • CIS accession           21 December
                                                                                               1991
The name has traditionally been derived from Hayk (Հայկ),            Area
the legendary patriarch of the Armenians and a great-great-          • Total                   29,743 km2
grandson of Noah, who, according to the 5th-century AD                                         (11,484 sq mi)
                                                                                               (138th)
author Moses of Chorene (Movsis Khorenatsi), defeated the
                                                                     • Water (%)               4.71[4]
Babylonian king Bel in 2492 BC and established his nation in
the Ararat region.[27] The further origin of the name is             Population
uncertain. It is also further postulated[28][29] that the name Hay   • 2024[5] estimate        3,015,400 (138th)
comes from one of the two confederated, Hittite vassal states –      • Density                 101.5/km2
the Ḫayaša-Azzi (1600–1200 BC).                                                                (262.9/sq mi)

                                                                     GDP (PPP)                 2024 estimate
The exonym Armenia is attested in the Old Persian Behistun           • Total                      $64.432
Inscription (515 BC) as Armina (𐎠𐎼𐎷𐎡𐎴). The                                                    billion[6] (114th)
Ancient Greek terms Ἀρμενία (Armenía) and Ἀρμένιοι
(Arménioi, "Armenians") are first mentioned by Hecataeus of          • Per capita             $21,746[6]
Miletus (c. 550 BC – c. 476 BC).[30] Xenophon, a Greek                                      (77th)
general serving in some of the Persian expeditions, describes        GDP (nominal)          2024 estimate
many aspects of Armenian village life and hospitality in around      • Total                   $25.408
401 BC.[31]                                                                                 billion[6] (115th)
                                                                     • Per capita              $8,575[6] (84th)
Some scholars have linked the name Armenia with the Early
                                                                     Gini (2022)                   27.9[7]
Bronze Age state of Armani (Armanum, Armi) or the Late                                          low inequality
Bronze Age state of Arme (Shupria).[32] These connections are
inconclusive as it is not known what languages were spoken in HDI (2022)                           0.786[8]
                                                                                                high (76th)
these kingdoms. Additionally, while it is agreed that Arme was
located to the immediate west of Lake Van (probably in the Currency                             Dram (֏) (AMD)
vicinity of Sason, and therefore in the greater Armenia region), Time zone                      UTC+4 (AMT)
the location of the older site of Armani is a matter of debate.
Some modern researchers have placed it near modern Date format                                  dd.mm.yyyy

Samsat,[33] and have suggested it was populated, at least Drives on                             right
partially, by an early Indo-European-speaking people.    [34] It is
                                                                     Calling code               +374
possible that the name Armenia originates in Armini, Urartian
for "inhabitant of Arme" or "Armean country".[35] The Arme ISO 3166 code                        AM
tribe of Urartian texts may have been the Urumu, who in the Internet TLD                        .am
12th century BC attempted to invade Assyria from the north                                      .հայ
with their allies the Mushki and the Kaskians. The Urumu
                                                                                      Website
apparently settled in the vicinity of Sason, lending their name            www.gov.am (https://www.gov.am)
to the regions of Arme and the nearby lands of Urme and Inner
Urumu.[36] Given that this was an exonym, it may have meant "wasteland, dense forest", cf. armutu (http://www.a
ina.org/cad/cad_a2.pdf) (wasteland), armaḫḫu (https://www.assyrianlanguages.org/akkadian/dosearch.php?sear
chkey=8112&language=id) (thicket, thick woods), armāniš (http://www.maravot.com/Akkadian.dictionary.html)
(tree). The southerners considered the northern forests to be the abode of dangerous beasts.

According to the histories of both Moses of Chorene and Michael Chamchian, Armenia derives from the name of
Aram, a lineal descendant of Hayk.[37][38] In the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament, the Table of Nations lists Aram as
the son of Shem, to whom the Book of Jubilees attests,

     And for Aram there came forth the fourth portion, all the land of Mesopotamia between the Tigris and
     the Euphrates to the north of the Chaldees to the border of the mountains of Asshur and the land of
     'Arara'.[39][40]


Jubilees 8:21 also apportions the Mountains of Ararat to Shem, which Jubilees 9:5 expounds to be apportioned to
Aram.[39][40]

The historian Flavius Josephus also states in his Antiquities of the Jews,
     Aram had the Aramites, which the Greeks called Syrians;... Of the four sons of Aram, Uz founded
     Trachonitis and Damascus: this country lies between Palestine and Celesyria. Ul founded Armenia; and
     Gather the Bactrians; and Mesa the Mesaneans; it is now called Charax Spasini.[41]




History

Prehistoric
The first human traces are supported by the presence of Acheulean tools,
generally close to the obsidian outcrops more than 1 million years ago.[42]

The most recent and important excavation is at the Nor Geghi 1 Stone Age
site in the Hrazdan river valley.[43] Thousands of 325,000 year-old
artifacts may indicate that this stage of human technological innovation
occurred intermittently throughout the Old World, rather than spreading
from a single point of origin (usually hypothesized to be Africa), as was
                                                                                  Bronze Age burial site Zorats Karer
previously thought.[44]                                                           (also known as Karahunj).

Many early Bronze Age settlements were built in Armenia (Valley of
Ararat, Shengavit, Harich, Karaz, Amiranisgora, Margahovit, Garni, etc.).
One of the important sites of the Early Bronze Age is Shengavit
Settlement,[45] It was located on the site of today's capital of Armenia,
Yerevan.

Such things were discovered in Armenia, for example, the oldest shoe,
oldest wagon, oldest skirt, and the oldest wine-making facility.[46]

                                                                                  Petroglyphs with images of various
Antiquity                                                                         animals on Mount Ughtasar.

Armenia lies in the highlands surrounding the mountains of
Ararat. There is evidence of an early civilisation in Armenia in
the Bronze Age and earlier, dating to about 4000 BC.
Archaeological surveys in 2010 and 2011 at the Areni-1 cave
complex have resulted in the discovery of the world's earliest
known leather shoe,[47] skirt,[48] and wine-producing
facility.[49]

Several Bronze Age cultures and states flourished in the area of
Greater Armenia, including the Trialeti-Vanadzor culture,
                                                                        Historical Armenia, 150 BC
Hayasa-Azzi, and Mitanni (located in southwestern historical
Armenia), all of which are believed to have had Indo-European
populations.[50][51][52][53][54][55] The Nairi confederation and its successor, Urartu, successively established their
sovereignty over the Armenian Highlands. Each of the aforementioned nations and confederacies participated in
the ethnogenesis of the Armenians.[56][57][58][59] A large cuneiform lapidary inscription found in Yerevan
established that the modern capital of Armenia was founded in the summer of 782 BC by King Argishti I. Yerevan
is one of the world's oldest continuously inhabited cities.[60]
After the fall of the state of Urartu at the beginning of the 6th century BC,
the Armenian Highlands were for some time under the hegemony of the
Medes, and after that they were part of the Achaemenid Empire. Armenia
was part of the Achaemenid state from the second half of the 6th century
BC until the second half of the 4th century BC divided into two satrapies -
XIII (western part, with the capital in Melitene) and XVIII (northeastern
part).[61]

During the late 6th century BC, the first geographical entity that was
                                                                                 Behistun Inscription of Darius I
called Armenia by neighbouring populations was established under the
                                                                                 mentioning Armenia. 6th century BC
Orontid Dynasty within the Achaemenid Empire, as part of the latter's
territories.[62]

The kingdom became fully sovereign from the sphere of influence of the
Seleucid Empire in 190 BC under King Artaxias I and begun the rule of
the Artaxiad dynasty. Armenia reached its height between 95 and 66 BC
under Tigranes the Great, becoming the most powerful kingdom of its time
east of the Roman Republic.[63] In the next centuries, Armenia was in the
Persian Empire's sphere of influence during the reign of Tiridates I, the
founder of the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia, which itself was a branch of
the Parthian Empire. Throughout its history, the kingdom of Armenia
enjoyed both periods of independence and periods of autonomy subject to
contemporary empires. Its strategic location between two continents has
subjected it to invasions by many peoples, including Assyria (under
                                                                              Coin of Tigranes the Great.
Ashurbanipal, at around 669–627 BC, the boundaries of Assyria reached
as far as Armenia and the Caucasus Mountains),[64] Medes, Achaemenid
Empire, Greeks, Parthians, Romans, Sasanian Empire, Byzantine Empire, Arabs, Seljuk Empire, Mongols,
Ottoman Empire, the successive Safavid, Afsharid, and Qajar dynasties of Iran, and the Russians.

Religion in ancient Armenia was historically related to a set of beliefs that,
in Persia, led to the emergence of Zoroastrianism. It particularly focused
on the worship of Mithra and also included a pantheon of gods such as
Aramazd, Vahagn, Anahit, and Astghik. The country used the solar
Armenian calendar, which consisted of 12 months.[66]

Christianity spread into the country in the early 4th century AD.[67]
Tiridates III of Armenia (238–314) made Christianity the state religion in
301,[67][68] partly, in defiance of the Sasanian Empire, it seems,[69]
becoming the first officially Christian state, ten years before the Roman
Empire granted Christianity an official toleration under Galerius, and
36 years before Constantine the Great was baptised. Prior to this, during        The pagan Garni Temple, probably
                                                                                 built in the first century, is the only
the latter part of the Parthian period, Armenia was a predominantly
                                                                                 "Greco-Roman colonnaded building"
Zoroastrian country.[69]
                                                                                 in the post-Soviet states.[65]

After the fall of the Kingdom of Armenia in 428, most of Armenia was
incorporated as a marzpanate within the Sasanian Empire.[70] Following the Battle of Avarayr in 451, Christian
Armenians maintained their religion and Armenia gained autonomy.[71]


Middle Ages
The Sassanid Empire was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate in the mid
7th century, reuniting Armenian lands previously taken by the Byzantine
Empire, and Armenia subsequently emerged as Arminiya, an autonomous
principality under the Umayyad Caliphate. The principality was ruled by
the Prince of Armenia, and recognised by the Caliph and the Byzantine
Emperor. It was part of the administrative division/emirate Arminiya
created by the Arabs, which also included parts of Georgia and Caucasian
Albania, and had its centre in the Armenian city, Dvin. Arminiya lasted
until 884, when it regained its independence from the weakened Abbasid          The Etchmiadzin Cathedral,
Caliphate under Ashot I of Armenia.[75]                                         Armenia's Mother Church
                                                                                traditionally dated 303 AD, is
The reemergent Armenian kingdom was ruled by the Bagratuni dynasty              considered the oldest cathedral in
and lasted until 1045. In time, several areas of the Bagratid Armenia       the world.[72][73][74]
separated as independent kingdoms and principalities such as the Kingdom
of Vaspurakan ruled by the House of Artsruni in the south, Kingdom of
Syunik in the east, or Kingdom of Artsakh on the territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh, while still recognising
the supremacy of the Bagratid kings.[76]

In 1045, the Byzantine Empire conquered Bagratid Armenia. Soon, the other Armenian states fell under
Byzantine control as well. The Byzantine rule was short-lived, as in 1071 the Seljuk Empire defeated the
Byzantines and conquered Armenia at the Battle of Manzikert, establishing the Seljuk Empire.[77] To escape
death or servitude at the hands of those who had assassinated his relative, Gagik II of Armenia, King of Ani, an
Armenian named Ruben I, Prince of Armenia, went with some of his countrymen into the gorges of the Taurus
Mountains and then into Tarsus of Cilicia. The Byzantine governor of the palace gave them shelter where the
Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia was eventually established on 6 January 1198 under Leo I, King of Armenia, a
descendant of Prince Ruben.[78]

Cilicia was a strong ally of the European Crusaders, and saw itself as a bastion of Christendom in the East.
Cilicia's significance in Armenian history and statehood is also attested by the transfer of the seat of the
Catholicos of the Armenian Apostolic Church, the spiritual leader of the Armenian people, to the region.[79]

The Seljuk Empire soon started to collapse. In the early 12th century, Armenian princes of the Zakarid family
drove out the Seljuk Turks and established a semi-independent principality in northern and eastern Armenia
known as Zakarid Armenia, which lasted under the patronage of the Georgian Kingdom. The Orbelian Dynasty
shared control with the Zakarids in various parts of the country, especially in Syunik and Vayots Dzor, while the
House of Hasan-Jalalyan controlled provinces of Artsakh and Utik as the Kingdom of Artsakh.[80]


Early Modern era
During the 1230s, the Mongol Empire conquered Zakarid Armenia and then the remainder of Armenia. The
Mongolian invasions were soon followed by those of other Central Asian tribes, such as the Kara Koyunlu,
Timurid dynasty and Ağ Qoyunlu, which continued from the 13th century until the 15th century. After incessant
invasions, each bringing destruction to the country, with time Armenia became weakened.[81]

In the 16th century, the Ottoman Empire and the Safavid dynasty of Iran divided Armenia. From the early 16th
century, both Western Armenia and Eastern Armenia fell to the Safavid Empire.[82][83] Owing to the century long
Turco-Iranian geopolitical rivalry that would last in West Asia, significant parts of the region were frequently
fought over between the two rivalling empires during the Ottoman–Persian Wars. From the mid 16th century with
the Peace of Amasya, and decisively from the first half of the 17th century with the Treaty of Zuhab until the first
half of the 19th century,[84] Eastern Armenia was ruled by the successive Safavid, Afsharid and Qajar empires,
while Western Armenia remained under Ottoman rule.
From 1604, Abbas I of Iran implemented a "scorched earth" policy in the
region to protect his north-western frontier against any invading Ottoman
forces, a policy that involved a forced resettlement of masses of
Armenians outside of their homelands.[85]

In the 1813 Treaty of Gulistan and the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay,
following the Russo-Persian War (1804–13) and the Russo-Persian War
(1826–28), respectively, the Qajar dynasty of Iran was forced to
irrevocably cede Eastern Armenia, consisting of the Erivan and Karabakh      In 1501–02, most of the Eastern
Khanates, to Imperial Russia.[86][87] This period is known as Russian        Armenian territories, including
Armenia.                                                                     Yerevan, were conquered by the
                                                                             emerging Safavid dynasty of Iran
While Western Armenia still remained under Ottoman rule, the Armenians       led by Shah Ismail I.
were granted considerable autonomy within their own enclaves and lived
in relative harmony with other groups in the empire (including the ruling
Turks). However, as Christians under a strict Muslim social structure,
Armenians faced pervasive discrimination. In response to 1894 Sasun
rebellion, Sultan Abdul Hamid II organised state-sponsored massacres
against the Armenians between 1894 and 1896, resulting in an estimated
death toll of 80,000 to 300,000 people. The Hamidian massacres, as they
came to be known, gave Hamid international infamy as the "Red Sultan"
or "Bloody Sultan".[88]
                                                                             Capture of Erivan fortress by
                                                                             Russian troops in 1827 during the
During the 1890s, the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, commonly
                                                                             Russo-Persian War (1826–28) by
known as Dashnaktsutyun, became active within the Ottoman Empire with        Franz Roubaud
the aim of unifying the various small groups in the empire that were
advocating for reform and defending Armenian villages from massacres
that were widespread in some of the Armenian-populated areas of the
empire. Dashnaktsutyun members also formed Armenian fedayi groups
that defended Armenian civilians through armed resistance. The Dashnaks
also worked for the wider goal of creating a "free, independent and
unified" Armenia, although they sometimes set aside this goal in favour of
a more realistic approach, such as advocating autonomy.

The Ottoman Empire began to collapse, and in 1908, the Young Turk
Revolution overthrew the government of Sultan Hamid. In April 1909, the
Adana massacre occurred in the Adana Vilayet of the Ottoman Empire           Armenian oblast (1828–1840)
resulting in the deaths of as many as 20,000–30,000 Armenians. The           included the territory of the former
Armenians living in the empire hoped that the Committee of Union and         Erivan (marked in yellow) and
                                                                             Nakhichevan (marked in light green)
Progress would change their second-class status. The Armenian reform
                                                                             khanates
package (1914) was presented as a solution by appointing an inspector
general over Armenian issues.[89]


World War I and the Armenian genocide
The outbreak of World War I led to confrontation between the Ottoman Empire and the Russian Empire in the
Caucasus and Persian campaigns. The new government in Istanbul began to look on the Armenians with distrust
and suspicion because the Imperial Russian Army contained a contingent of Armenian volunteers. On 24 April
1915, Armenian intellectuals were arrested by Ottoman authorities and, with the Tehcir Law (29 May 1915),
eventually a large proportion of Armenians living in Anatolia perished in what has become known as the
Armenian genocide.[90][91]
The genocide was implemented in two phases: the wholesale killing of the
able-bodied male population through massacre and subjection of army
conscripts to forced labour, followed by the deportation of women,
children, the elderly and infirm on death marches leading to the Syrian
desert. Driven forward by military escorts, the deportees were deprived of
food and water and subjected to periodic robbery, rape, and
massacre.[92][93] There was local Armenian resistance in the region,
developed against the activities of the Ottoman Empire. The events of
                                                                                Armenian genocide victims in 1915
1915 to 1917 are regarded by Armenians and the vast majority of Western
historians to have been state-sponsored mass killings, or genocide.[94]

Turkish authorities deny the genocide took place to this day. The Armenian Genocide is acknowledged to have
been one of the first modern genocides.[95][96] According to the research conducted by Arnold J. Toynbee, an
estimated 600,000 Armenians died during deportation from 1915 to 1916. This figure, however, accounts for
solely the first year of the Genocide and does not take into account those who died or were killed after the report
was compiled on 24 May 1916.[97] The International Association of Genocide Scholars places the death toll at
"more than a million".[98] The total number of people killed has been most widely estimated at between 1 and 1.5
million.[99]

Armenia and the Armenian diaspora have been campaigning for official recognition of the events as genocide for
over 30 years. These events are traditionally commemorated yearly on 24 April, the Armenian Martyr Day, or the
Day of the Armenian genocide.[100]


First Republic of Armenia
Although the Russian Caucasus Army of Imperial forces commanded by
Nikolai Yudenich and Armenians in volunteer units and Armenian militia
led by Andranik Ozanian and Tovmas Nazarbekian succeeded in gaining
most of Western Armenia during World War I, their gains were lost with
the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917.[102] At the time, Russian-controlled
Eastern Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan attempted to bond together in
the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic. This federation,
however, lasted from only February to May 1918, when all three parties              Territory held by Armenia and
decided to dissolve it. As a result, the Dashnaktsutyun government of           the Karabakh Council at some point
Eastern Armenia declared its independence on 28 May as the First                   Area given to Armenia by the
Republic of Armenia under the leadership of Aram Manukian.[103]                 Treaty of Sèvres, which was never
                                                                                enforced[101]
The First Republic's short-lived independence was fraught with war,
territorial disputes, large-scale rebellions, and a mass influx of refugees
from Western Armenia, bringing with them disease and starvation. The Entente Powers sought to help the newly
founded Armenian state through relief funds and other forms of support.[104]

At the end of the war, the victorious powers sought to divide up the Ottoman Empire. Signed between the Allied
and Associated Powers and Ottoman Empire at Sèvres on 10 August 1920, the Treaty of Sèvres promised to
maintain the existence of the Armenian republic and to attach the former territories of Western Armenia to it.[105]
Because the new borders of Armenia were to be drawn by United States President Woodrow Wilson, Western
Armenia was also referred to as "Wilsonian Armenia". In addition, just days prior, on 5 August 1920, Mihran
Damadian of the Armenian National Union, the de facto Armenian administration in Cilicia, declared the
independence of Cilicia as an Armenian autonomous republic under French protectorate.[106]
There was even consideration of making Armenia a mandate under the protection
of the United States. The treaty, however, was rejected by the Turkish National
Movement, and never came into effect.[107] The movement used the treaty as the
occasion to declare itself the rightful government of Turkey, replacing the
monarchy based in Istanbul with a republic based in Ankara.

In 1920, Turkish nationalist forces invaded the fledgling Armenian republic from
the east. Turkish forces under the command of Kazım Karabekir captured
Armenian territories that Russia had annexed in the aftermath of the 1877–1878
Russo-Turkish War and occupied the old city of Alexandropol (present-day
Gyumri). The violent conflict finally concluded with the Treaty of Alexandropol
on 2 December 1920. The treaty forced Armenia to disarm most of its military
forces, cede all former Ottoman territory granted to it by the Treaty of Sèvres, and    The Government house of
to give up all the "Wilsonian Armenia" granted to it at the Sèvres treaty.              the First Republic of
Simultaneously, the Soviet Eleventh Army, under the command of Grigoriy                 Armenia (1918–1920)
Ordzhonikidze, invaded Armenia at Karavansarai (present-day Ijevan) on 29
November. By 4 December, Ordzhonikidze's forces entered Yerevan and the short-
lived Armenian republic collapsed.[108]

After the fall of the republic, the February Uprising soon took place in 1921, and led to the establishment of the
Republic of Mountainous Armenia by Armenian forces under command of Garegin Nzhdeh on 26 April, which
fought off both Soviet and Turkish intrusions in the Zangezur region of southern Armenia. After Soviet
agreements to include the Syunik Province in Armenia's borders, the rebellion ended and the Red Army took
control of the region on 13 July.


Armenian SSR

1922 to World War II
Armenia was annexed by the Red Army and along with Georgia and
Azerbaijan, was incorporated into the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
as part of the Transcaucasian SFSR (TSFSR) on 4 March 1922.[109][110]
With this annexation, the Treaty of Alexandropol was superseded by the
Turkish-Soviet Treaty of Kars. In the agreement, Turkey allowed the
Soviet Union to assume control over Adjara with the port city of Batumi in
return for sovereignty over the cities of Kars, Ardahan, and Iğdır, all of
which were part of Russian Armenia.[109][110]
                                                                                The coat of arms of Soviet Armenia
The TSFSR existed from 1922 to 1936, when it was divided up into three       depicting Mount Ararat in the centre
separate entities (Armenian SSR, Azerbaijan SSR, and Georgian SSR).
Armenians enjoyed a period of relative stability within USSR in contrast
to the turbulent final years of the Ottoman Empire. The situation was difficult for the church, which struggled
with secular policies of USSR. After the death of Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, the general secretary of the
Communist Party, gradually established himself as the dictator of the USSR. Stalin's reign was characterized by
mass repressions, that cost millions of lives all over the USSR.


World War II and post-Stalinist period
Armenia was not the scene of any battles in World War II. An estimated 500,000 Armenians (nearly a third of the
population) served in the Red Army during the war, and 175,000 died.[111] A total of 117 citizens of Armenia
including 10 non ethnic Armenians were awarded Hero of the Soviet Union. Six special military divisions were
formed in Soviet Armenia in 1941–42, partly because so
many draftees from the republic could not understand
Russian. Five of them, the 89th, 409th, 408th, 390th, and 76th
Divisions, would have a distinguished war record, while the
sixth was ordered to stay in Armenia to guard the republic's
western borders against a possible incursion by neighboring
                                                                  Armenian Marshals and Admiral of World War II
Turkey. The 89th Tamanyan Division, composed of ethnic
                                                                  on stamps: Bagramyan, Isakov, Babadzhanian,
Armenians, fought in the Battle of Berlin and entered Berlin.
                                                                  Khudyakov

It is claimed that the freedom index in the region had seen an
improvement after the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953 and the emergence of Nikita Khrushchev as the new general
secretary of the CPSU. Soon, life in Armenia's SSR began to see rapid improvement. The church, which was
limited during the secretaryship of Stalin, was revived when Catholicos Vazgen I assumed the duties of his office
in 1955. In 1967, a memorial to the victims of the Armenian genocide was built at the Tsitsernakaberd hill above
the Hrazdan gorge in Yerevan. This occurred after mass demonstrations took place on the tragic event's fiftieth
anniversary in 1965.


Gorbachev era
During the Gorbachev era of the 1980s, with the reforms of Glasnost and
Perestroika, Armenians began to demand better environmental care for
their country, opposing the pollution that Soviet-built factories brought.
Tensions also developed between Soviet Azerbaijan and its autonomous
district of Nagorno-Karabakh, a majority-Armenian region. About 484,000
Armenians lived in Azerbaijan in 1970.[112] The Armenians of Karabakh
demanded unification with Soviet Armenia. Peaceful protests in Armenia
                                                                              Armenians gather at Theater
supporting the Karabakh Armenians were met with anti-Armenian
                                                                              Square in central Yerevan to claim
pogroms in Azerbaijan, such as the one in Sumgait, which was followed
                                                                              unification of Nagorno-Karabakh
by anti-Azerbaijani violence in Armenia.[113] Compounding Armenia's           Autonomous Oblast with the
problems was a devastating earthquake in 1988 with a moment magnitude         Armenian SSR (1988)
of 7.2.[114]

Gorbachev's inability to alleviate any of Armenia's problems created disillusionment among the Armenians and
fed a growing hunger for independence. In May 1990, the New Armenian Army (NAA) was established, serving
as a defence force separate from the Soviet Red Army. Clashes soon broke out between the NAA and Soviet
Internal Security Forces (MVD) troops based in Yerevan when Armenians decided to commemorate the
establishment of the 1918 First Republic of Armenia. The violence resulted in the deaths of five Armenians killed
in a shootout with the MVD at the railway station. Witnesses there claimed that the MVD used excessive force
and that they had instigated the fighting.

Further firefights between Armenian militiamen and Soviet troops occurred in Sovetashen, near the capital and
resulted in the deaths of over 26 people, mostly Armenians. The pogrom of Armenians in Baku in January 1990
forced almost all of the 200,000 Armenians in the Azerbaijani capital Baku to flee to Armenia.[115] On 23 August
1990, Armenia declared its sovereignty on its territory. On 17 March 1991, Armenia, along with the Baltic states,
Georgia and Moldova, boycotted a nationwide referendum in which 78% of all voters voted for the retention of
the Soviet Union in a reformed form.[116]


Restoration of independence
On 21 September 1991, Armenia officially declared its statehood after the
failed August coup in Moscow, RSFSR. Levon Ter-Petrosyan was
popularly elected the first President of the newly independent Republic of
Armenia on 16 October 1991. He had risen to prominence by leading the
Karabakh movement for the unification of the Armenian-populated
Nagorno-Karabakh.[117] On 26 December 1991, the Soviet Union ceased
to exist and Armenia's independence was recognised.

Ter-Petrosyan led Armenia alongside Defense Minister Vazgen Sargsyan            Armenian soldiers in 2008, during
through the First Nagorno-Karabakh War with neighbouring Azerbaijan.            the ongoing and unresolved
                                                                                Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
The initial post-Soviet years were marred by economic difficulties, which
had their roots early in the Karabakh conflict when the Azerbaijani
Popular Front managed to pressure the Azerbaijan SSR to instigate a railway and air blockade against Armenia.
This move effectively debilitated Armenia's economy as 85% of its cargo and goods arrived through rail
traffic.[117] In 1993, Turkey joined the blockade against Armenia in support of Azerbaijan.[118]

The Karabakh war ended after a Russian-brokered ceasefire was put in place in 1994. The war was a success for
the Karabakh Armenian forces who managed to capture 16% of Azerbaijan's internationally recognised territory
including almost all of the Nagorno-Karabakh itself.[119] The Armenian backed forces remained in control of
practically all of that territory until 2020. The economies of both Armenia and Azerbaijan have been hurt in the
absence of a complete resolution and Armenia's borders with Turkey and Azerbaijan remain closed. By the time
both Azerbaijan and Armenia had finally agreed to a ceasefire in 1994, an estimated 30,000 people had been
killed and over a million had been displaced.[120] Several thousand were killed in the later 2020 Karabakh war.


21st century
In the 21st century, Armenia faces many hardships. It has made a full switch to a market economy. One study
ranks it the 50th most "economically free" nation in the world, as of 2023.[121] Its relations with Europe, the Arab
League, and the Commonwealth of Independent States have allowed Armenia to increase trade.[122][123] Gas, oil,
and other supplies come through two vital routes: Iran and Georgia. As of 2016, Armenia maintained cordial
relations with both countries.[124]

The 2018 Armenian Revolution was a series of anti-government protests in Armenia from April to May 2018
staged by various political and civil groups led by a member of the Armenian parliament — Nikol Pashinyan
(head of the Civil Contract party). Protests and marches took place initially in response to Serzh Sargsyan's third
consecutive term as President of Armenia and later against the Republican Party controlled government in
general. Pashinyan declared the movement, which led to Sargsyan's resignation, a "velvet revolution".[125]

In March 2018, the Armenian parliament elected Armen Sarkissian as the new President of Armenia. The
controversial constitutional reform to reduce presidential power was implemented, while the authority of the
prime minister was strengthened.[126] In May 2018, parliament elected opposition leader Nikol Pashinyan as the
new prime minister. His predecessor Serzh Sargsyan resigned two weeks earlier following widespread anti-
government demonstrations.[127]

On 27 September 2020, a full-scale war erupted due to the unresolved Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.[128] Both the
armed forces of Armenia and Azerbaijan reported military and civilian casualties.[129] The Nagorno-Karabakh
ceasefire agreement to end the six-week war between Armenia and Azerbaijan was seen by many as Armenia's
defeat and capitulation.[130] The year-long March of Dignity protests forced early elections.
On 20 June 2021, Pashinyan's Civil Contract party won an early parliamentary election. Acting Prime Minister
Nikol Pashinyan was officially appointed to the post of prime minister by Armenia's President Armen
Sarkissian.[131] In January 2022, Armenian President Armen Sarkissian resigned from office, stating that the
constitution no longer gives the president sufficient powers or influence.[132] On 3 March 2022, Vahagn
Khachaturyan was elected as the fifth president of Armenia in the second round of parliamentary vote.[133] The
next month yet more protests broke out.[134]


2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh
Between 19 and 20 September 2023, Azerbaijan launched a large-scale military offensive against the self-
declared breakaway state of Artsakh, a move seen by the European Parliament as a violation of the 2020 ceasefire
agreement.[135][136] The offensive took place in the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh, which is
internationally recognized as part of Azerbaijan, but populated by Armenians.[137][138] The attacks occurred in the
midst of an escalating crisis caused by Azerbaijan blockading Artsakh, which resulted in significant scarcities of
essential supplies such as food, medicine, and other goods in the affected region.[139]

One day after the offensive started, on 20 September, a ceasefire agreement was reached at the mediation of the
Russian peacekeeping command in Nagorno-Karabakh.[140] Azerbaijan held a meeting with representatives of the
Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians on 21 September in Yevlakh, to be followed by another meeting in
October.[141][142] Ceasefire violations by Azerbaijan were nonetheless reported by both Artsakhi residents and
officials.[143][144]

Human rights organizations and experts in genocide prevention issued multiple alerts, stating that the region's
Armenian population was at risk or actively being subjected to ethnic cleansing and genocide. Luis Moreno
Ocampo, a former prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, warned that another Armenian genocide could
take place, and attributed the inaction of the international community to encouraging Azerbaijan that it would face
no serious consequences.[145]



Geography
Armenia is a landlocked country in the geopolitical Transcaucasus (South
Caucasus) region, that is located in the Southern Caucasus Mountains and
their lowlands between the Black Sea and Caspian Sea, and northeast of
the Armenian Highlands. Located in West Asia,[146][10] on the Armenian
Highlands, it is bordered by Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north, the
Lachin corridor which is a part of Lachin District that is under the control
of a Russian peacekeeping force and Azerbaijan proper to the east, and
Iran and Azerbaijan's exclave of Nakhchivan to the south.[12] Armenia lies
between latitudes 38° and 42° N, and meridians 43° and 47° E. It contains
two terrestrial ecoregions: Caucasus mixed forests and Eastern Anatolian
montane steppe.[147]
                                                                                Satellite image of the territory of
                                                                                Armenia (2003).
Topography
Armenia has a territorial area of 29,743 square kilometres (11,484 sq mi).
The terrain is mostly mountainous, with fast flowing rivers, and few forests. The land rises to 4,090 metres
(13,419 feet) above sea level at Mount Aragats, and no point is below 390 metres (1,280 ft) above sea level.[148]
Average elevation of the country area is tenth highest in the world and it has 85.9% mountain area, more than
Switzerland or Nepal.[149]
Mount Ararat, which was historically part of Armenia, is the highest
mountain in the region at 5,137 meters (16,854 feet). Now located in
Turkey, but clearly visible from Armenia, it is regarded by the Armenians
as a symbol of their land. Because of this, the mountain is present on the
Armenian national emblem today.[150][151][152]


Climate
The climate in Armenia is markedly highland continental. Summers are
hot, dry and sunny, lasting from June to mid-September. The temperature
fluctuates between 22 and 36 °C (72 and 97 °F). However, the low                 Armenia's mountainous and
humidity level mitigates the effect of high temperatures. Evening breezes        volcanic topography
blowing down the mountains provide a welcome refreshing and cooling
effect. Springs are short, while autumns are long. Autumns are known for
their vibrant and colourful foliage.

Winters are quite cold with plenty of snow, with temperatures ranging
between −10 and −5 °C (14 and 23 °F). Winter sports enthusiasts enjoy
skiing down the hills of Tsaghkadzor, located thirty minutes outside
Yerevan. Lake Sevan, nestled up in the Armenian highlands, is the second
largest lake in the world relative to its altitude, at 1,900 metres (6,234 ft)
                                                                                 Köppen-Geiger climate classification
above sea level.                                                                 map for Armenia[153]


Environment
Armenia ranked 63rd out of 180 countries on Environmental Performance
Index (EPI) in 2018. Its rank on subindex Environmental Health (which is
weighted at 40% in EPI) is 109, while Armenia's rank on subindex of
Ecosystem Vitality (weighted at 60% in EPI) is 27th best in the world.[154]
This suggests that main environmental issues in Armenia are with
population health, while environment vitality is of lesser concern. Out of
sub-subindices contributing to Environmental Health subindex ranking on          Carbon dioxide emissions in metric
Air Quality to which population is exposed is particularly unsatisfying.         tons per capita in Armenia,
                                                                                 Azerbaijan, Georgia, Russia,
In Armenia forest cover is around 12% of the total land area, equivalent to      Germany, Italy, USA in 2000–2012.
328,470 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 334,730 hectares (ha)         World Bank data.
in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 310,000 hectares
(ha) and planted forest covered 18,470 hectares (ha). Of the naturally
regenerating forest 5% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible
indications of human activity) and around 0% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year
2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.[155][156]

Waste management in Armenia is underdeveloped, as no waste sorting or recycling takes place at Armenia's 60
landfills. A waste processing plant is scheduled for construction near Hrazdan city, which will allow for closure of
10 waste dumps.[157]
Despite the availability of abundant renewable energy sources in Armenia (especially hydroelectric and wind
power) and calls from EU officials to shut down the nuclear power plant at Metsamor,[158] the Armenian
Government is exploring the possibilities of installing new small modular nuclear reactors. In 2018 existing
nuclear plant is scheduled for modernization to enhance its safety and increase power production by about
10%.[159][160]



Government and politics
Armenia is a representative parliamentary democratic republic. The
Armenian constitution adhered to the model of a semi-presidential
republic until April 2018.

According to the current Constitution of Armenia, the President is the head
of state holding largely representational functions, while the Prime
Minister is the head of government and exercises executive power.
                                                                               The National Assembly in Yerevan
Since 1995 Legislative power is vested in the Azgayin Zhoghov or
National Assembly, which is a unicameral parliament consisting of 105
members.[161]

The Fragile States Index since its first report in 2006 until most recent in 2019, consistently ranked Armenia
better than all its neighboring countries (with one exception in 2011).[162]

Armenia has universal suffrage above the age of eighteen.[163][164]


Foreign relations
Armenia became a member of the United Nations on 2 March 1992, and is
a signatory to a number of its organizations and other international
agreements. Armenia is also a member of international organisations such
as the Council of Europe, the Asian Development Bank, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Political
Community, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the International Monetary Fund,
the World Trade Organization, the World Customs Organization, the              Armenian President Armen
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation and La                      Sarkissian with U.S. Secretary Mike
Francophonie. It is a member of the CSTO military alliance, and also           Pompeo
participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace program and the Euro-
Atlantic Partnership Council. In 2004, its forces joined KFOR, a NATO-
led international force in Kosovo. Armenia is also an observer member of the Arab League,[165] the Organization
of American States, the Pacific Alliance, the Non-Aligned Movement, and a dialogue partner in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organisation. As a result of its historical ties to France, Armenia was selected to host the biennial
Francophonie summit in 2018.[166]

Armenia has a difficult relation with neighbouring countries Azerbaijan and Turkey. Tensions were running high
between Armenians and Azerbaijanis during the final years of the Soviet Union. The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
dominated the region's politics throughout the 1990s.[167] To this day, Armenia's borders with Turkey and
Azerbaijan are under severe blockade. In addition, a permanent solution for the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has
not been reached despite the mediation provided by organizations such as the OSCE.
Turkey also has a long history of poor relations with Armenia over its refusal to acknowledge the Armenian
genocide, even though it was one of the first countries to recognize the Republic of Armenia (the third republic)
after its independence from the USSR in 1991. Despite this, for most of the 20th century and early 21st century,
relations remain tense and there are no formal diplomatic relations between the two countries due to Turkey's
refusal to establish them for numerous reasons. During the first Nagorno-Karabakh War, and citing it as the
reason, Turkey closed its border with Armenia in 1993. It has not lifted its blockade despite pressure from the
powerful Turkish business lobby interested in Armenian markets.[167]

                                          On 10 October 2009, Armenia and Turkey signed protocols on the
                                          normalisation of relations, which set a timetable for restoring diplomatic
                                          ties and reopening their joint border.[168] The ratification of those had to
                                          be made in the national parliaments. In Armenia, before sending the
                                          protocols to the parliament, it was sent to the Constitutional Court to have
                                          their constitutionality to be approved. The Constitutional Court made
                                          references to the preamble of the protocols underlying three main
                                          issues.[169] One of them stated that the implementation of the protocols did
 Russian President Vladimir Putin
 shakes hands with Armenian Prime         not imply Armenia's official recognition of the existing Turkish-Armenian
 Minister Nikol Pashinyan.                border established by the Treaty of Kars. By doing so, the Constitutional
                                          Court rejected one of the main premises of the protocols, i.e. "the mutual
                                          recognition of the existing border between the two countries as defined by
relevant treaties of international law". [169][170] This was for the Turkish Government the reason to back down
from the Protocols.  [171] The Armenian President had made multiple public announcements, both in Armenia and
abroad, that, as the leader of the political majority of Armenia, he assured the parliamentary ratification of the
protocols if Turkey also ratified them. Despite this, the process stopped, as Turkey continuously added more
preconditions to its ratification and also "delayed it beyond any reasonable time-period".

Due to its position between two hostile neighbours, Armenia has close security ties with Russia. At the request of
the Armenian government, Russia maintains a military base in the city of Gyumri located in Northwestern
Armenia[172] as a deterrent against Turkey. Despite this, Armenia has also been looking toward Euro-Atlantic
structures in recent years. Armenia maintains positive relations with the United States, which is home to the
second largest Armenian diaspora community in the world. According to the US Census Bureau, there are
427,822 Armenian Americans in the country.[173]

Because of the illicit border blockades by Azerbaijan and Turkey, Armenia
continues to maintain solid relations with its southern neighbour Iran,
especially in the economic sector. Economic projects are being developed
between the two nations, including a gas pipeline going from Iran to
Armenia.

Armenia is a member of the Council of Europe and maintains close
relations with the European Union; especially with its member states
France and Greece. In January 2002, the European Parliament noted that            Russian President Dmitry Medvedev
                                                                                  at the Armenian Genocide memorial
Armenia may enter the EU in the future.[174] A 2005 survey reported that
                                                                                  in Yerevan
64% of Armenians favored joining the EU,[175] a move multiple Armenian
officials have voiced support for.[176]

A former republic of the Soviet Union and an emerging democracy, Armenia was negotiating to become an
associate EU partner and had completed negotiations to sign an Association Agreement with a Deep and
Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the EU in 2013. However, the government opted not to finalize the
agreement, and instead joined the Eurasian Economic Union.[177][178][179] Despite this, Armenia and the EU
finalized the Armenia-EU Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA) on 24 November 2017.
The agreement enhances the relationship between Armenia and the EU to a new partnership level, further
develops cooperation in economic, trade and political areas, aims to improve investment climate, and is designed
to bring Armenian law gradually closer to the EU acquis.[180][181][182]

Legally speaking, Armenia has the right to be considered as a prospective EU member provided it meets
necessary standards and criteria, though officially such a plan does not exist in Brussels.[183][184][185][186]
Armenia is included in the EU's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) and participates in both the Eastern
Partnership and the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly, which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.

Following the 2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh, Armenia's relations with a long-term ally Russia
started to deteriorate. In February 2024, Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan said that the CSTO "hasn't
fulfilled its security obligations towards Armenia" and that "in practice we have basically frozen our participation
in the CSTO".[187] On 28 February 2024, during a speech made in the National Assembly, Pashinyan further
stated that the CSTO is "a threat to the national security of Armenia".[188] In March 2024, Armenia officially
expelled Russian border guards from the Zvartnots International Airport in Yerevan.[189]

On 2 March 2024, Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan advised that Armenia would officially "apply to
become a candidate for EU membership in the coming days, within a month at most".[190][191] On 5 March,
Pashinyan stated that Armenia would apply for EU candidacy by Autumn 2024 at the latest.[192] On 8 March
2024, Armenian Foreign Minister Ararat Mirzoyan stated, "Armenia is seeking to get closer to the West amid
worsening relations with Russia" and "New opportunities are largely being discussed in Armenia nowadays, that
includes membership in the European Union".[193][194]


Military
The Armenian Army and Air Force are the two branches of the Armed
Forces of Armenia. The Armenian military was formed after the collapse
of the Soviet Union in 1991 and with the establishment of the Ministry of
Defence in 1992. The Commander-in-Chief of the military is the Prime
Minister of Armenia, Nikol Pashinyan. The Ministry of Defence is in
charge of political leadership, headed by Davit Tonoyan, while military
command remains in the hands of the general staff, headed by the Chief of
Staff, who is Lieutenant-General Onik Gasparyan.
                                                                                Armenian Air Force Su-25s during a
                                                                                military parade
Active forces now number about 81,000 soldiers, with an additional
reserve of 32,000 troops. Armenian border guards are in charge of
patrolling the country's borders with Georgia and Azerbaijan, while Russian troops continue to monitor its
borders with Iran and Turkey. In the case of an attack, Armenia is able to mobilize every able-bodied man
between the age of 15 and 59, with military preparedness.

The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which establishes comprehensive limits on key categories
of military equipment, was ratified by the Armenian parliament in July 1992. In March 1993, Armenia signed the
multilateral Chemical Weapons Convention, which calls for the eventual elimination of chemical weapons.
Armenia acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as a non-nuclear weapons state in July 1993.
Armenia is a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO). Armenia also has an Individual
Partnership Action Plan with NATO and it participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace (PiP) program and the
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC).


Human rights and freedom
Human rights in Armenia tend to be better than those in most former
Soviet republics and have drawn closer to acceptable standards, especially
economically. Nonetheless, there are still several considerable problems.

Armenia scored 5.63 on The Economist Democracy Index, published in
January 2023 (data for 2022). Although still classified as "hybrid regime",
Armenia recorded the strongest improvement among European countries
and reached its ever-best score since calculation began in 2006.[195]

Armenia is classified as "partly free" in the 2019 report (with data from       In April 2018, a quasi-authoritarian
2018) by Freedom House, which gives it a score of 51 out of 100,[196]           regime collapsed as a result of a
                                                                                nationwide protest movement in
which is 6 points ahead of the previous estimate.[197]
                                                                                Armenia.

Armenia recorded unprecedented progress in the 2019 World Press
Freedom Index published by Reporters Without Borders, improving its position by 19 points and ranking 61st on
the list. The publication also confirms the absence of cases of killed journalists, citizen journalists or media
assistants.[198][199]

Armenia ranks 26th in the 2022 report of The Human Freedom Index published by the American CATO Institute
and Canada's Fraser Institute.[200]

Armenia ranked 29th for economic freedom and 76th for personal freedom among 159 countries in the 2017
Human Freedom Index published by the Cato Institute.[201][202]

These classifications may improve when data from 2018, including the period of the velvet revolution and
thereafter, is analyzed.

In October 2023 Armenia ratified signing the Rome statute, whereby Armenia will become a full member of the
International Criminal Court.[203]


Administrative divisions
Armenia is divided into ten provinces (marzer,
singular marz), with the city (kaghak) of Yerevan
(Երևան) having special administrative status as                        Lori
                                                            Shirak                 Tavush
the country's capital. The chief executive in each of
the ten provinces is the marzpet (marz governor),
appointed by the government of Armenia. In
Yerevan, the chief executive is the mayor, elected           Aragatsotn Kotayk
                                                                               Gegharkunik
since 2009.
                                                             ArmavirYerevan
Within each province there are communities
                                                                              Ararat
(hamaynkner, singular hamaynk). Each community
                                                                                         Vayots
is self-governing and consists of one or more                                             Dzor
settlements (bnakavayrer, singular bnakavayr).
Settlements are classified as either towns
                                                                                                        Syunik
(kaghakner, singular kaghak) or villages (gyugher,
singular gyugh). As of 2007, Armenia includes 915
communities, of which 49 are considered urban and
866 are considered rural. The capital, Yerevan, also
has the status of a community.[204] Additionally,
Yerevan is divided into twelve semi-autonomous districts.
                                                                                  Geghard monastery, Kotayk
                                                                                  Province


                                                                                      Population     Population
                                                                            Area
               Province                             Capital                              (2011          (2022
                                                                            (km2)
                                                                                      census)[205]   census)[206]
 Aragatsotn       Արագածոտն            Ashtarak           Աշտարակ           2,756     132,925        128,941

 Ararat           Արարատ               Artashat           Արտաշատ           2,090     260,367        248,982
 Armavir          Արմավիր              Armavir            Արմավիր           1,242     265,770        253,493

 Gegharkunik      Գեղարքունիք          Gavar              Գավառ             5,349     235,075        209,669
 Kotayk           Կոտայք               Hrazdan            Հրազդան           2,086     254,397        269,883

 Lori             Լոռի                 Vanadzor           Վանաձոր           3,799     235,537        222,805
 Shirak           Շիրակ                Gyumri             Գյումրի           2,680     251,941        235,484

 Syunik           Սյունիք              Kapan              Կապան             4,506     141,771        114,488
 Tavush           Տավուշ               Ijevan             Իջևան             2,704     128,609        114,940

 Vayots Dzor      Վայոց Ձոր            Yeghegnadzor       Եղեգնաձոր         2,308     52,324         47,369
 Yerevan          Երևան                         –                –          223       1,060,138      1,086,677



Economy
The economy relies heavily on investment and support from Armenians abroad.[207] Before independence,
Armenia's economy was largely industry-based – chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic
rubber, and textile – and highly dependent on outside resources. The republic had developed a modern industrial
sector, supplying machine tools, textiles, and other manufactured goods to sister republics in exchange for raw
materials and energy.[67]

Agriculture accounted for less than 20% of both net material product and total employment before the dissolution
of the Soviet Union in 1991. After independence, the importance of agriculture in the economy increased
markedly, its share at the end of the 1990s rising to more than 30% of GDP and more than 40% of total
employment.[208] This increase in the importance of agriculture was attributable to food security needs of the
population in the face of uncertainty during the first phases of transition and the collapse of the non-agricultural
sectors of the economy in the early 1990s. As the economic situation stabilised and growth resumed, the share of
agriculture in GDP dropped to slightly over 20% (2006 data), although the share of agriculture in employment
remained more than 40%.[209]

Armenian mines produce copper, zinc, gold, and lead. The vast majority of energy is produced with fuel imported
from Russia, including gas and nuclear fuel (for its one nuclear power plant); the main domestic energy source is
hydroelectric. Small deposits of coal, gas, and petroleum exist but have not yet been developed.
Access to biocapacity in Armenia is lower than world average. In 2016,
Armenia had 0.8 global hectares [210] of biocapacity per person within its
territory, much less than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per
person.[211] In 2016 Armenia used 1.9 global hectares of biocapacity per
person—their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use
double as much biocapacity as Armenia contains. As a result, Armenia is
running a biocapacity deficit.[210]

Like other newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, Armenia's       Yerevan is the economic and
                                                                                cultural centre of Armenia.
economy suffers from the breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns.
Soviet investment in and support of Armenian industry has virtually
disappeared, so that few major enterprises are still able to function. In addition, the effects of the 1988 Spitak
earthquake, which killed more than 25,000 people and made 500,000 homeless, are still being felt. The conflict
with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has not been resolved. Shutdown of the nuclear power plant in 1989 led
to the Armenian energy crisis of 1990s. The GDP fell nearly 60% between 1989 and 1993, but then resumed
robust growth after the power plant was reopened in 1995.[208] The national currency, the dram, suffered
hyperinflation for the first years after its introduction in 1993.

Nevertheless, the government was able to make wide-ranging economic reforms that paid off in dramatically
lower inflation and steady growth. The 1994 ceasefire in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has also helped the
economy. Armenia has had strong economic growth since 1995, building on the turnaround that began the
previous year, and inflation has been negligible for the past several years. New sectors, such as precious-stone
processing and jewelry making, information and communication technology and tourism are beginning to
supplement more traditional sectors of the economy, such as agriculture.[212]

This steady economic progress has earned Armenia increasing support from international institutions. The
International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD),
and other international financial institutions (IFIs) and foreign countries are extending considerable grants and
loans. Loans to Armenia since 1993 exceed $1.1 billion. These loans are targeted at reducing the budget deficit
and stabilising the currency; developing private businesses; energy; agriculture; food processing; transportation;
the health and education sectors; and ongoing rehabilitation in the earthquake zone. The government joined the
World Trade Organization on 5 February 2003. But one of the main sources of foreign direct investments remains
the Armenian diaspora, which finances major parts of the reconstruction of infrastructure and other public
projects. Being a growing democratic state, Armenia also hopes to get more financial aid from the Western World.

A liberal foreign investment law was approved in June 1994, and a law on privatization was adopted in 1997, as
well as a program of state property privatization. Continued progress will depend on the ability of the government
to strengthen its macroeconomic management, including increasing revenue collection, improving the investment
climate, and making strides against corruption. However, unemployment, which was 18.5% in 2015,[213] still
remains a major problem due to the influx of thousands of refugees from the Karabakh conflict.

In 2017, the economy grew by 7.5% due to rising copper prices.[161]

In 2022, Armenia's GDP stood at $39.4 billion, and enjoyed an economic freedom index of 65.3, according to
Heritage Organisation.[214]

The Armenian economy is predicted to grow by 13% in 2022 due to a huge influx of Russian citizens.[215] The
IMF's preliminary forecast as of March 2022 predicted growth of 1.5% for the year.[216]


Science and technology
Research spending is low in Armenia, averaging 0.25% of GDP over 2010–2013. However, the statistical record
of research expenditure is incomplete, as expenditure by privately owned business enterprises is not surveyed in
Armenia. The world average for domestic expenditure on research was 1.7% of GDP in 2013.[217]

The country's Strategy for the Development of Science 2011–2020
envisions that 'by 2020, Armenia is a country with a knowledge-based
economy and is competitive within the European Research Area with its
level of basic and applied research.' It fixes the following targets:[217]

    Creation of a system capable of sustaining the development of
    science and technology;
    Development of scientific potential, modernization of scientific
    infrastructure;
    Promotion of basic and applied research;                                   Gross domestic expenditure on
    Creation of a synergistic system of education, science and                 R&D (GERD) to GDP ratio for the
    innovation; and                                                            Black Sea countries, 2001–2013.
    Becoming a prime location for scientific specialization in the             Source: UNESCO Science Report:
    European Research Area.                                                    towards 2030 (2015), Figure 12.3.

Based on this strategy, the accompanying Action Plan was approved by the
government in June 2011. It defines the following targets:[217]

    Improve the management system for science and technology and create the requisite conditions for
    sustainable development;
    Involve more young, talented people in education and research, while upgrading research
    infrastructure;
    Create the requisite conditions for the development of an integrated national innovation system;
    and
    Enhance international co-operation in research and development.
Although the Strategy clearly pursues a 'science push' approach, with
public research institutes serving as the key policy target, it nevertheless
mentions the goal of establishing an innovation system. However, the
main driver of innovation, the business sector, is not mentioned. In
between publishing the Strategy and Action Plan, the government issued a
resolution in May 2010 on Science and Technology Development
Priorities for 2010–2014. These priorities are:[217]

    Armenian studies, humanities and social sciences;
    Life sciences;
    Renewable energy, new energy sources;
    Advanced technologies, information technologies;                           GERD in the Black Sea region by
    Space, Earth sciences, sustainable use of natural resources;               sector of performance, 2005 and
    and                                                                        2013. Source: UNESCO Science
                                                                               Report: towards 2030 (2015), Figure
    Basic research promoting essential applied research.
                                                                               12.5.
The Law on the National Academy of Sciences was adopted in May 2011.
This law is expected to play a key role in shaping the Armenian innovation
system. It allows the National Academy of Sciences to extend its business activities to the commercialization of
research results and the creation of spin-offs; it also makes provision for restructuring the National Academy of
Sciences by combining institutes involved in closely related research areas into a single body. Three of these new
centres are particularly relevant: the Centre for Biotechnology, the Centre for Zoology and Hydro-ecology and the
Centre for Organic and Pharmaceutical Chemistry.[217]
The government is focusing its support on selected industrial sectors. More than 20 projects have been cofunded
by the State Committee of Science in targeted branches: pharmaceuticals, medicine and biotechnology,
agricultural mechanization and machine building, electronics, engineering, chemistry and, in particular, the
sphere of information technology.[217]

Over the past decade, the government has made an effort to encourage science–industry linkages. The Armenian
information technology sector has been particularly active: a number of public–private partnerships have been
established between companies and universities, in order to give students marketable skills and generate
innovative ideas at the interface of science and business. Examples are Synopsys Inc. and the Enterprise
Incubator Foundation.[217] Armenia was ranked 63rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.[218]



Demographics
Armenia has a population of 2,932,731 as of 2022[219] and is the third
most densely populated of the former Soviet republics.[220] There has been
a problem of population decline due to elevated levels of emigration after
the break-up of the USSR.[221] In the past years emigration levels have
declined and some population growth is observed since 2012.[222]

Armenia has a relatively large external diaspora (8 million by some
estimates, greatly exceeding the 3 million population of Armenia itself),
with communities existing across the globe. The largest Armenian               Population pyramid 2016
communities outside of Armenia can be found in Russia, France, Iran, the
United States, Georgia, Syria, Lebanon, Australia, Canada, Greece,
Cyprus, Israel, Poland, Ukraine and Brazil. 40,000 to 70,000 Armenians
still live in Turkey (mostly in and around Istanbul).[223]

About 1,000 Armenians reside in the Armenian Quarter in the Old City of
Jerusalem, a remnant of a once-larger community.[224] Italy is home to the
                                                                                The Armenian population around the
San Lazzaro degli Armeni, an island located in the Venetian Lagoon,
                                                                                world
which is completely occupied by a monastery run by the Mechitarists, an
Armenian Catholic congregation.[225] Approximately 139,000 Armenians
lived in the de facto independent country Republic of Artsakh where they formed a majority before 1 October
2023, when almost the entire population of the region had fled to Armenia.[226][227]


Cities
                                      Largest cities or towns in Armenia
                                             Armenia 2022 census[206]
                   Rank   Name     Province Pop. Rank Name        Province Pop.
                    1 Yerevan      Yerevan 1,086,677 11 Artashat Ararat      19,020
                    2 Gyumri       Shirak    112,301 12 Sevan Gegharkunik 18,705
                    3 Vanadzor     Lori       75,186 13 Ijevan   Tavush      18,689
                    4 Abovyan      Kotayk     46,434 14 Gavar    Gegharkunik 17,741
                                                                                                    Vanadzor
     Yerevan        5 Vagharshapat Armavir    44,837 15 Artik    Shirak      17,647
                    6 Hrazdan      Kotayk     44,231 16 Goris    Syunik      17,113
                    7 Kapan        Syunik     32,780 17 Ararat   Ararat      16,592
                    8 Armavir      Armavir    27,470 18 Dilijan  Tavush      15,914
                    9 Charentsavan Kotayk     22,071 19 Ashtarak Aragatsotn 15,686
      Gyumri                                                                                         Abovyan
                     10 Masis           Ararat       20,081 20 Sisian        Syunik          13,179


Ethnic groups
Ethnic Armenians make up 98.1% of the population. Yazidis make up
1.1%, and Russians 0.5%. Other minorities include Assyrians, Ukrainians,
Greeks (usually called Caucasus Greeks), Kurds, Georgians, Belarusians,
and Jews. There are also smaller communities of Vlachs, Mordvins,
Ossetians, Udis, and Tats. Minorities of Poles and Caucasus Germans also
exist though they are heavily Russified.[228] As of 2022, there are 31,077
                                                                                Historical and modern
Yazidis in Armenia.[229]                                                        distribution of Armenians.
                                                                                Settlement area of Armenians in
During the Soviet era, Azerbaijanis were historically the second largest        early 20th century:
population in the country, numbering 76,550 in 1922,[230] and forming               >50%         25–50%
about 2.5% in 1989.[231] However, due to the conflict over Nagorno-                   <25%
Karabakh, virtually all of them emigrated from Armenia to Azerbaijan.                 Armenian settlement area today
Conversely, Armenia received a large influx of Armenian refugees from
Azerbaijan, thus giving Armenia a more homogeneous character.

According to Gallup research conducted in 2017 Armenia has one of the highest migrant acceptance (welcoming)
rates in eastern Europe.[232]


Languages
Armenians have their own distinct alphabet and language,[233] which is the only
official language. The alphabet was invented c. AD 405 by Mesrop Mashtots and
consists of thirty-nine letters, three of which were added during the Cilician
period.[234] The main foreign languages that Armenians know are Russian and
English. Due to its Soviet past, most of the old population can speak Russian quite
well. According to a 2013 survey, 95% of Armenians said they had some
knowledge of Russian (24% advanced, 59% intermediate) compared to 40% who
said they knew some English (4% advanced, 16% intermediate and 20%
beginner). However, more adults (50%) think that English should be taught in
public secondary schools than those who prefer Russian (44%).[235]

                                                                                          Armenian-language writing
Religion
Armenia was the first nation to adopt Christianity as a state religion, an
event traditionally dated to AD 301.[236][237][238]

The predominant religion in Armenia is Christianity. Its roots go back to
the 1st century AD, when it was founded by two of Jesus' twelve apostles
– Thaddaeus and Bartholomew – who preached Christianity in Armenia
between AD 40–60.

Over 93% of Christians in Armenia belong to the Armenian Apostolic              The 7th-century Khor Virap
Church,[239][240] which is in communion only with the churches                  monastery in the shadow of Mount
comprising Oriental Orthodoxy—of which it is itself a member.                   Ararat, the peak on which Noah's
                                                                                Ark, is said to have landed during
The Catholic Church maintains jurisdictions of both the Latin Church and        the biblical flood.
Armenian Catholic Church in Armenia. Of note are the Mechitarists (also
spelled "Mekhitarists" Armenian: Մխիթարեան), a congregation of
Benedictine monks in the Armenian Catholic Church, founded in 1712 by
Mekhitar of Sebaste. They are best known for their series of scholarly publications
of ancient Armenian versions of otherwise lost ancient Greek texts.

The Armenian Evangelical Church has several thousand members throughout the
country.

Other Christian denominations in Armenia are the Pentecostal branches of
Protestant community such as the Word of Life, the Armenian Brotherhood
Church,[241] the Baptists (which are known as one of the oldest existing
denominations in Armenia, and were permitted by the authorities of the Soviet
Union),[242][243] and Presbyterians.[244]

Armenia is also home to a Russian community of Molokans which practice a form
of Spiritual Christianity originated from the Russian Orthodox Church.[245]

The Yazidis, who live in the western part of the country, practice Yazidism.[246]
The world's largest Yazidi temple, Quba Mêrê Dîwanê, was completed in
2019[247] in the village of Aknalich.[229]                                             Portal to the Holy City at
                                                                                       Echmiazin, the seat of the
                                                                                       Catholicos
There is a Jewish community in Armenia of approximately 750 people since
independence with most emigrants leaving for Israel. There are currently two
synagogues in Armenia – one in the capital, Yerevan, and the other in the city of Sevan located near Lake Sevan.


Health care
Healthcare in Armenia has undergone significant changes since independence in 1991. Initially, the Soviet
healthcare system was highly centralized and provided free medical assistance to all citizens. After independence,
the healthcare system underwent reform and primary care services have been free of charge since 2006. Despite
improvements in accessibility and the implementation of an Open Enrollment program, out-of-pocket health
expenditures remain high and corruption among healthcare professionals remains a concern.[248] In 2019,
healthcare became free for all citizens under the age of 18 and the number of people receiving free or subsidized
care under the Basic Benefits Package was increased.[249][250]

After a significant decline in earlier decades, crude[h] birth rates in Armenia slightly increased from 13.0 (per
1000 people) in the year 1998 to 14.2 in 2015;[251] this timeframe also showed a similar trajectory in the crude
death rate, which grew from 8.6 to 9.3.[252] Life expectancy at birth at 74.8 years was the 4th-highest among the
Post-Soviet states in 2014.[253]


Education
In medieval times, the University of Gladzor and University of Tatev took
an important role for Armenian education.

A literacy rate of 100% was reported as early as 1960.[254] In the
communist era, Armenian education followed the standard Soviet model
of complete state control (from Moscow) of curricula and teaching
methods and close integration of education activities with other aspects of
society, such as politics, culture, and the economy.[254]
                                                                               Yerevan State University building
In the 1988–89 school year, 301 students per 10,000 were in specialized secondary or higher education, a figure
slightly lower than the Soviet average.[254] In 1989, some 58% of Armenians over age fifteen had completed their
secondary education, and 14% had a higher education.[254] In the 1990–91 school year, the estimated 1,307
primary and secondary schools were attended by 608,800 students.[254] Another seventy specialised secondary
institutions had 45,900 students, and 68,400 students were enrolled in a total of ten postsecondary institutions that
included universities.[254] In addition, 35% of eligible children attended preschools.[254] In 1992 Armenia's
largest institution of higher learning, Yerevan State University, had eighteen departments, including ones for
social sciences, sciences, and law.[254] Its faculty numbered about 1,300 teachers and its student population about
10,000 students.[254] The National Polytechnic University of Armenia is operating since 1933.[254]

In the early 1990s, Armenia made substantial changes to the centralised and regimented Soviet system.[254]
Because at least 98% of students in higher education were Armenian, curricula began to emphasise Armenian
history and culture.[254] Armenian became the dominant language of instruction, and many schools that had
taught in Russian closed by the end of 1991.[254] Russian was still widely taught, however, as a second
language.[254]

In 2014, the National Program for Educational Excellence embarked on creating an internationally competitive
and academically rigorous alternative educational program (the Araratian Baccalaureate) for Armenian schools
and increasing the importance and status of the teacher's role in society.[255][256]

The Ministry of Education and Science is responsible for regulation of the sector. Primary and secondary
education in Armenia is free, and completion of secondary school is compulsory.[254] Higher education in
Armenia is harmonized with the Bologna process and the European Higher Education Area. The Armenian
National Academy of Sciences plays an important role in postgraduate education.

Schooling takes 12 years in Armenia and breaks down into primary (4 years), middle (5 years) and high school (3
years). Schools engage a 10-grade mark system. The government also supports Armenian schools outside of
Armenia.

Gross enrollment in tertiary education at 44% in 2015 surpassed peer countries of the South Caucasus but
remained below the average for Europe and Central Asia.[257] However, public spending per student in tertiary
education in GDP-ratio terms is one of the lowest for post-USSR countries (for which data was available).[258]



Culture

Architecture
Armenian architecture, as it originates in an earthquake-prone region,
tends to be built with this hazard in mind. Armenian buildings tend to be
rather low-slung and thick-walled in design. Armenia has abundant
resources of stone, and relatively few forests, so stone was nearly always
used throughout for large buildings. Small buildings and most residential
buildings were normally constructed of lighter materials, and hardly any
early examples survive, as at the abandoned medieval capital of Ani.[259]        Zvartnots Cathedral, 643–652,
                                                                                 UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Music and dance
Armenian music is a mix of indigenous folk music, perhaps best-represented by Djivan Gasparyan's well-known
duduk music, as well as light pop, and extensive Christian music.
Instruments like the duduk, dhol, zurna, and kanun are commonly found in
Armenian folk music. Artists such as Sayat Nova are famous due to their
influence in the development of Armenian folk music. One of the oldest
types of Armenian music is the Armenian chant which is the most
common kind of religious music in Armenia. Many of these chants are
ancient in origin, extending to pre-Christian times, while others are
relatively modern, including several composed by Saint Mesrop Mashtots,
the inventor of the Armenian alphabet. Whilst under Soviet rule, the
Armenian classical music composer Aram Khatchaturian became                     Armenian folk musicians
internationally well known for his music, for various ballets and the Sabre
Dance from his composition for the ballet Gayane.

The Armenian Genocide caused widespread emigration that led to the settlement of Armenians in various
countries in the world. Armenians kept to their traditions and certain diasporans rose to fame with their music. In
the post-genocide Armenian community of the United States, the so-called "kef" style Armenian dance music,
using Armenian and Middle Eastern folk instruments (often electrified/amplified) and some western instruments,
was popular. This style preserved the folk songs and dances of Western Armenia, and many artists also played the
contemporary popular songs of Turkey and other Middle Eastern countries from which the Armenians emigrated.

Richard Hagopian is perhaps the most famous artist of the traditional "kef"
style and the Vosbikian Band was notable in the 1940s and 1950s for
developing their own style of "kef music" heavily influenced by the
popular American Big Band Jazz of the time. Later, stemming from the
Middle Eastern Armenian diaspora and influenced by Continental
European (especially French) pop music, the Armenian pop music genre
grew to fame in the 1960s and 1970s with artists such as Adiss
Harmandian and Harout Pamboukjian performing to the Armenian
diaspora and Armenia; also with artists such as Sirusho, performing pop
                                                                                Traditional Armenian dance
music combined with Armenian folk music in today's entertainment
industry.

Other Armenian diasporans that rose to fame in classical or international music circles are world-renowned
French-Armenian singer and composer Charles Aznavour, pianist Sahan Arzruni, prominent opera sopranos such
as Hasmik Papian and more recently Isabel Bayrakdarian and Anna Kasyan. Certain Armenians settled to sing
non-Armenian tunes such as the heavy metal band System of a Down (which nonetheless often incorporates
traditional Armenian instrumentals and styling into their songs) or pop star Cher. In the Armenian diaspora,
Armenian revolutionary songs are popular with the youth. These songs encourage Armenian patriotism and are
generally about Armenian history and national heroes.


Art
Yerevan Vernissage (arts and crafts market), close to Republic Square, bustles with hundreds of vendors selling a
variety of crafts on weekends and Wednesdays (though the selection is much reduced mid-week). The market
offers woodcarving, antiques, fine lace, and the hand-knotted wool carpets and kilims that are a Caucasus
speciality. Obsidian, which is found locally, is crafted into assortment of jewellery and ornamental objects.
Armenian gold smithery enjoys a long tradition, populating one corner of the market with a selection of gold
items. Soviet relics and souvenirs of recent Russian manufacture – nesting dolls, watches, enamel boxes and so
on – are also available at the Vernisage.
Across from the Opera House, a popular art market fills another city park on the
weekends. Armenia's long history as a crossroads of the ancient world has resulted
in a landscape with innumerable fascinating archaeological sites to explore.
Medieval, Iron Age, Bronze Age and even Stone Age sites are all within a few
hours drive from the city. All but the most spectacular remain virtually
undiscovered, allowing visitors to view churches and fortresses in their original
settings.

                                       The National Art Gallery in Yerevan has
                                       more than 16,000 works that date back to
                                       the Middle Ages, which indicate Armenia's
                                       rich tales and stories of the times. It houses
                                                                                      Ancient Armenian
                                       paintings by many European masters as
                                                                                      Khachkars (cross-stones)
                                       well. The Modern Art Museum, the
                                       Children's Picture Gallery, and the Martiros
                                       Saryan Museum are only a few of the other noteworthy collections of fine
Queen Zabel's Return to the Palace,
                                       art on display in Yerevan. Moreover, many private galleries are in
Vardges Sureniants (1909)
                                       operation, with many more opening every year, featuring rotating
                                       exhibitions and sales.

On 13 April 2013, the Armenian government announced a change in law to allow freedom of panorama for 3D
works of art.[260]


Media
Television, magazines, and newspapers are all operated by both state-owned and for-profit corporations which
depend on advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Armenia guarantees
freedom of speech and Armenia ranks 61st in the 2020 Press Freedom Index report compiled by Reporters
Without Borders, between Georgia and Poland.[261] Armenia's press freedom rose considerably following the
2018 Velvet Revolution.[262]

As of 2020, the biggest issue facing press freedom in Armenia is judicial harassment of journalists, specifically
defamation suits and attacks on journalists' right to protect sources,[263] as well as excessive responses to combat
disinformation spread by social media users. Reporters Without Borders also cites continued concerns about lack
of transparency regarding ownership of media outlets.[261]


Cinema
Cinema in Armenia was born on 16 April 1923, when the Armenian State Committee of Cinema was established
by a decree of the Soviet Armenian government.

However, the first Armenian film with Armenian subject called "Haykakan Sinema" was produced earlier in 1912
in Cairo by Armenian-Egyptian publisher Vahan Zartarian. The film was premiered in Cairo on 13 March
1913.[264]

In March 1924, the first Armenian film studio; Armenfilm (Armenian: Հայֆիլմ "Hayfilm", Russian:
Арменкино "Armenkino") was established in Yerevan, starting with a documentary film called Soviet Armenia.
Namus was the first Armenian silent black-and-white film, directed by Hamo Beknazarian in 1925, based on a
play of Alexander Shirvanzade, describing the ill fate of two lovers, who were engaged by their families to each
other since childhood, but because of violations of namus (a tradition of honor), the girl was married by her father
to another person. The first sound film, Pepo was shot in 1935 and directed by Hamo Beknazarian.


Cuisine
Armenian cuisine is closely related to eastern and Mediterranean cuisine; various
spices, vegetables, fish, and fruits combine to present unique dishes. The main
characteristics of Armenian cuisine are a reliance on the quality of the ingredients
rather than heavily spicing food, the use of herbs, the use of wheat in a variety of
forms, of legumes, nuts, and fruit (as a main ingredient as well as to sour food),
and the stuffing of a wide variety of leaves.

The pomegranate, with its symbolic association with fertility, represents the
nation. The apricot is the national fruit.


Sport
A wide array of sports are played in Armenia, the most popular among them being      Armenian wine
wrestling, weightlifting, judo, association football, chess, and boxing. Armenia's
mountainous terrain provides great opportunities for the practice of sports
like skiing and climbing. Being a landlocked country, water sports can
only be practised on lakes, notably Lake Sevan. Competitively, Armenia
has been successful in chess, weightlifting and wrestling at the
international level. Armenia is also an active member of the international
sports community, with full membership in the Union of European
Football Associations (UEFA) and International Ice Hockey Federation
                                                                              The Vazgen Sargsyan Republican
(IIHF). It also hosts the Pan-Armenian Games.
                                                                                Stadium in Yerevan

Prior to 1992, Armenians would participate in the Olympics representing
the USSR. As part of the Soviet Union, Armenia was very successful,
winning plenty of medals and helping the USSR win the medal standings
at the Olympics on numerous occasions. The first medal won by an
Armenian in modern Olympic history was by Hrant Shahinyan (sometimes
spelled as Grant Shaginyan), who won two golds and two silvers in
gymnastics at the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki. To highlight the
level of success of Armenians in the Olympics, Shahinyan was quoted as
saying:
                                                                                The Armenia national football team
"Armenian sportsmen had to outdo their opponents by several notches for
                                                                                in Dublin, Ireland
the shot at being accepted into any Soviet team. But those difficulties
notwithstanding, 90 percent of Armenian athletes on Soviet Olympic
teams came back with medals."[265]

Armenia first participated at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona under a unified CIS team, where it was
very successful, winning three golds and one silver in weightlifting, wrestling and sharp shooting, despite only
having five athletes. Since the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Armenia has participated as an
independent nation.
Armenia participates in the Summer Olympic Games in boxing, wrestling,
weightlifting, judo, gymnastics, track and field, diving, swimming and sharp
shooting. It also participates in the Winter Olympic Games in alpine skiing, cross-
country skiing and figure skating.

Football is also popular in Armenia. The most successful team was the FC Ararat
Yerevan team of the 1970s who won the Soviet Cup in 1973 and 1975 and the
Soviet Top League in 1973. The latter achievement saw FC Ararat gain entry to
the European Cup where – despite a home victory in the second leg – they lost on
aggregate at the quarter-final stage to eventual winner FC Bayern Munich.
Armenia competed internationally as part of the USSR national football team until
the Armenian national football team was formed in 1992 after the split of the
Soviet Union. Armenia have never qualified for a major tournament although
recent improvements saw the team to achieve 44th position in the FIFA World           Chess Grandmaster Levon
                                                                                      Aronian is a former FIDE
Rankings in September 2011. The national team is controlled by the Football
                                                                                      No. 2 rated player and the
Federation of Armenia. The Armenian Premier League is the highest level football      fourth-highest rated player
competition in Armenia, and has been dominated by FC Pyunik in recent seasons.        in history.
The league currently consists of eight teams and relegates to the Armenian First
League.

Armenia and the Armenian diaspora have produced many successful footballers,
including Henrikh Mkhitaryan, Youri Djorkaeff, Alain Boghossian, Andranik
Eskandarian, Andranik Teymourian, Edgar Manucharyan, Khoren Oganesian and
Nikita Simonyan. Djokaeff and Boghossian won the 1998 FIFA World Cup with
France, Teymourian competed in the 2006 World Cup for Iran and Manucharyan
played in the Dutch Eredivisie for Ajax. Mkhitaryan has been one of the most
successful Armenian footballers in recent years, playing for international clubs
such as Borussia Dortmund, Manchester United, Arsenal, A.S. Roma and currently
for Inter Milan.[266]

Wrestling has been a successful sport in the Olympics for Armenia. At the 1996
Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Armen Nazaryan won the gold in the Men's Greco-
Roman Flyweight (52 kg) category and Armen Mkrtchyan won the silver in Men's          Tigran Petrosyan 9th World
Freestyle Paperweight (48 kg) category, securing Armenia's first two medals in its    Chess Champion
Olympic history.

Traditional Armenian wrestling is called Kokh and practised in traditional garb; it was one of the influences
included in the Soviet combat sport of Sambo, which is also very popular.[267]

The government of Armenia budgets about $2.8 million annually for sports and gives it to the National
Committee of Physical Education and Sports, the body that determines which programs should benefit from the
funds.[265]

Due to the lack of success lately on the international level, in recent years, Armenia has rebuilt 16 Soviet-era
sports schools and furnished them with new equipment for a total cost of $1.9 million. The rebuilding of the
regional schools was financed by the Armenian government. $9.3 million has been invested in the resort town of
Tsaghkadzor to improve the winter sports infrastructure because of dismal performances at recent winter sports
events. In 2005, a cycling centre was opened in Yerevan with the aim of helping produce world class Armenian
cyclists. The government has also promised a cash reward of $700,000 to Armenians who win a gold medal at the
Olympics.[265]
Armenia has also been very successful in chess, winning the World Champion in 2011 and the World Chess
Olympiad on three occasions.[268]



See also

     Asia portal

     Europe portal


   Armenians
   History of Armenia
   Index of Armenia-related articles
   List of people on coins of Armenia
   Outline of Armenia


Explanatory notes
 a. The list recognises the language of Yazidis, as separate from Kurdish.
 b. Through the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
 c. /ɑːrˈmiːniə/ ar-MEE-nee-ə[9]
     Armenian: Հայաստան, romanized: Hayastan IPA: [hɑjɑsˈtɑn]
 d. Armenian: Հայաստանի Հանրապետություն, romanized: Hayastani Hanrapetut'yun, IPA:
     [hɑjɑstɑˈni hɑnɾɑpɛtutʰˈjun]
 e. Smaller nations that have claimed a prior official adoption of Christianity include Osroene, the
     Silures, and San Marino. See Timeline of official adoptions of Christianity.
  f. The republic has separation of church and state.
 g. On 12 June 2024, Armenia announced that it would formally withdraw from the CSTO at a later
     unspecified date
 h. Crude rates are not age-adjusted.


Source attribution
     This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0. Text
   taken from UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030​(http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/0023
   54/235406e.pdf), 324–26, UNESCO, UNESCO Publishing.


Citations
 1. "Constitution of Armenia, Article 20" (https://president.am/en/constitution-2015). president.am.
    Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20221203013237/https://president.am/en/constitution-2015/)
    from the original on 3 December 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2018.
 2. "States Parties to the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and their regional or
    minority languages" (https://rm.coe.int/november-2022-revised-table-languages-covered-english-/1
    680a8fef4). Council of Europe. 1 November 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2023.
 3. "CIA World Factbook" (https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/armenia/). 5 March 2024.
    Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210104184358/https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/cou
    ntries/armenia/) from the original on 4 January 2021. Retrieved 23 January 2021.
 4. "The World Fact Book – Armenia" (https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/armenia/).
    Central Intelligence Agency. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210104184358/https://www.ci
    a.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/armenia/) from the original on 4 January 2021. Retrieved 17 July
    2010.
 5. "Average de jure Population Number, thousand pers.* / 2024" (https://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=12&
    id=11001).
 6. "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2024" (https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/weo-dat
    abase/2024/April/weo-report?c=911,&s=NGDPD,PPPGDP,NGDPDPC,PPPPC,&sy=2020&ey=2028
    &ssm=0&scsm=1&scc=0&ssd=1&ssc=0&sic=0&sort=country&ds=.&br=1). Washington, D.C.:
    International Monetary Fund. April 2024. Retrieved 21 April 2024.
 7. "Gini index - Armenia" (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?locations=AM). World
    Bank. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20181121041937/https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
    SI.POV.GINI?locations=AM) from the original on 21 November 2018. Retrieved 22 April 2024.
 8. "Human Development Report 2023/2024" (https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2023-24_HDR/HD
    R23-24_Statistical_Annex_HDI_Table.xlsx). United Nations Development Programme. 19 March
    2024. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240319085123/https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/file
    s/2023-24_HDR/HDR23-24_Statistical_Annex_HDI_Table.xlsx) from the original on 19 March 2024.
    Retrieved 19 March 2024.
 9. "Armenia (http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/armenia?s=t) Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
    b/20151210220614/http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/armenia?s=t) 10 December 2015 at the
    Wayback Machine." Dictionary.com Unabridged. 2015.
10. The UN classification of world regions (http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49regin.htm)
    Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20020625192322/http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m
    49regin.htm) 25 June 2002 at the Wayback Machine places Armenia in West Asia; the CIA World
    Factbook "Armenia" (https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/armenia/). The World
    Factbook. CIA. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210104184358/https://www.cia.gov/the-wor
    ld-factbook/countries/armenia/) from the original on 4 January 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2010.
    "Armenia" (https://www.nationalgeographic.org/society/education-resources/?xpop=1). National
    Geographic. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20070808084113/http://www.nationalgeographi
    c.com/xpeditions/atlas/index.html?Parent=asia&Rootmap=armeni&Mode=d&SubMode=w) from the
    original on 8 August 2007. Retrieved 16 April 2009., "Armenia" (https://www.britannica.com/EBchec
    ked/topic/35178/Armenia). Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/200904
    01081831/https://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/35178/Armenia) from the original on 1 April
    2009. Retrieved 16 April 2009., Calendario Atlante De Agostini (in Italian) (111 ed.). Novara: Istituto
    Geografico De Agostini. 2015. p. sub voce. ISBN 9788851124908. and Oxford Reference Online
    "World Encyclopedia". Oxford Reference (https://archive.org/details/worldencyclopedi00oxfo).
    World Encyclopedia. Oxford Reference Online. 2004. doi:10.1093/acref/9780199546091.001.0001
    (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Facref%2F9780199546091.001.0001). ISBN 9780199546091. also
    place Armenia in Asia.
11. "General information about Republic of Armenia" (https://www.mfa.am/en/overview/). Armenia:
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Armenia). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20231005071515/http
    s://www.mfa.am/en/overview/) from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved 2 October 2023. "The
    country is situated in western part of Asia, occupies the north-eastern part of Armenian plateau –
    between Caucasus and Nearest Asia"
12. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Economic History (https://archive.org/details/oxfordencycloped0000uns
    e/page/156). Oxford University Press. 2003. p. 156 (https://archive.org/details/oxfordencycloped000
    0unse/page/156). ISBN 978-0-19-510507-0.
13. Mallory, J. P.; Adams, Douglas Q. (1997). Encyclopedia of Indo-European culture. London: Fitzroy
    Dearborn. p. 30. ISBN 978-1884964985. OCLC 37931209 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/379312
    09). "Armenian presence in their historical seats should then be sought at some time before c 600
    BC; [...] Armenian phonology, for instance, appears to have been greatly affected by Urartian, which
    may suggest a long period of bilingualism."
14. Robert Drews (2017). Militarism and the Indo-Europeanizing of Europe. Routledge. ISBN 978-
    0367886004. p. 228: "The vernacular of the Great Kingdom of Biainili was quite certainly Armenian.
    The Armenian language was obviously the region's vernacular in the fifth century BC, when Persian
    commanders and Greek writers paired it with Phrygian. That it as brought into the region between
    the early sixth and the early fifth century BC, and that it immediately obliterated whatever else had
    been spoken there, can hardly be supposed; [...] Because Proto-Armenian speakers seem to have
    lived not far from Hurrian speakers our conclusion must be that the Armenian language of Mesrop
    Mashtots was descended from an Indo-European language that had been spoken in southern
    Caucasia in the Bronze Age."
15. (Garsoïan, Nina (1997). R.G. Hovannisian (ed.). Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Times.
    Vol. 1. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 81.)
16. Stringer, Martin D. (2005). A Sociological History of Christian Worship (https://archive.org/details/so
    ciologicalhist00stri). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 92 (https://archive.org/details/socio
    logicalhist00stri/page/n101). ISBN 978-0-521-81955-8.
17. Grousset, René (1947). Histoire de l'Arménie (1984 ed.). Payot. p. 122.. Estimated dates vary from
    284 to 314. Garsoïan (op.cit. p. 82), following the research of Ananian, favours the latter.
18. "Constitution of Armenia - Library - The President of Armenia" (https://president.am/en/constitution-
    2015). president.am. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20221203013237/https://president.am/e
    n/constitution-2015/) from the original on 3 December 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2020.
19. Acharian, Hrachia (1946). Hayocʿ anjnanunneri baṙaran (http://www.nayiri.com/imagedDictionaryBr
    owser.jsp?dictionaryId=35&query=%D5%80%D5%A1%D5%B5%D5%A1%D5%BD%D5%BF%D
    5%A1%D5%B6) [Dictionary of Personal Names of Armenians] (in Armenian). Vol. 3. Yerevan:
    Yerevan University Press. p. 29. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20231005071515/http://ww
    w.nayiri.com/imagedDictionaryBrowser.jsp?dictionaryId=35&query=%D5%80%D5%A1%D5%B5%
    D5%A1%D5%BD%D5%BF%D5%A1%D5%B6) from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved
    2 October 2023.
20. Ագաթանգեղոս §§ 13 (ի Հայաստան աշխարհէս), 16 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս 2x, ի
    Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 35 (Հայաստան աշխարհին), 160 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս),
    249 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 715 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 776 (Հայաստան
    աշխարհին), 784 (Հայաստան աշխարհին), 796 (ի մէջ Հայաստան աշխարհի), 808
    (հասանէին ի Հայաստան աշխարհն)։
21. Ագաթանգեղոս § 885 (ի Հայաստան երկրին)
22. Փաւստոս Բուզանդ 1883=1984, էջ 1 (Հայաստան աշխարհին)
23. Փաւստոս Բուզանդ 1883=1984, 4.բ, էջ 56 (Հայաստան երկրին)
24. 904=1985, էջ 2 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 110 (կանայս ի Հայաստան աշխարհիս)
25. Կորիւն 1994, էջ 83 (Հայաստան աշխարհի), 93 (Հայաստան աշխարհին), 103 (ի
    Հայաստան աշխարհին), 120 (ի Հայաստան աշխարհէս)
26. ժը (սեռ. Հայաստանեայց, բացառ. ի Հայաստանեայց), տես Աբգարյան 1979, էջ 66, 90
27. Razmik Panossian, The Armenians: From Kings And Priests to Merchants And Commissars,
    Columbia University Press (2006), ISBN 978-0-231-13926-7, p. 106.
28. Rafael Ishkhanyan, "Illustrated History of Armenia," Yerevan, 1989
29. Elisabeth Bauer. Armenia: Past and Present (1981), p. 49
30. "Χαλύβοισι πρὸς νότον Ἀρμένιοι ὁμουρέουσι (The Armenians border on the Chalybes to the
    south)". Chahin, Mark (2001). The Kingdom of Armenia. London: Routledge. p. fr. 203. ISBN 978-0-
    7007-1452-0.
31. Xenophon. Anabasis. pp. IV.v.2–9.
32. Ibp Inc (1 September 2013). Armenia Country Study Guide Volume 1 Strategic Information and
    Developments (https://books.google.com/books?id=3WqaAAAAQBAJ&pg=PA42). International
    Business Publications, USA. p. 42. ISBN 978-1438773827.
33. Archi, Alfonso (2016). "Egypt or Iran in the Ebla Texts?" (https://www.academia.edu/34915656).
    Orientalia. 85: 3. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210815194611/https://www.academia.ed
    u/34915656) from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 8 June 2019.
34. Kroonen G, Barjamovic G, Peyrot M (9 May 2018). "Linguistic supplement to Damgaard et al. 2018:
    Early Indo-European languages, Anatolian, Tocharian and Indo-Iranian" (https://zenodo.org/record/1
    240524). Zenodo: 3. doi:10.5281/zenodo.1240524 (https://doi.org/10.5281%2Fzenodo.1240524).
    Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190629152739/https://zenodo.org/record/1240524) from
    the original on 29 June 2019. Retrieved 8 June 2019.
35. Armen Petrosyan. The Indo-European and Ancient Near Eastern Sources of the Armenian Epic.
    Journal of Indo-European Studies. Institute for the Study of Man. 2002. p. 184. [1] (https://www.aca
    demia.edu/3656244/The_Indo_European_and_Ancient_Near_Eastern_Sources_of_the_Armenian_
    Epic_Washington_D_C_2002?auto=download) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210709184
    415/https://www.academia.edu/3656244/The_Indo_European_and_Ancient_Near_Eastern_Source
    s_of_the_Armenian_Epic_Washington_D_C_2002?auto=download) 9 July 2021 at the Wayback
    Machine
36. Armen Petrosyan. The Indo-European and Ancient Near Eastern Sources of the Armenian Epic.
    Journal of Indo-European Studies. Institute for the Study of Man. 2002. pp. 166–167. [2] (https://ww
    w.academia.edu/3656244/The_Indo_European_and_Ancient_Near_Eastern_Sources_of_the_Arm
    enian_Epic_Washington_D_C_2002?auto=download) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210
    709184415/https://www.academia.edu/3656244/The_Indo_European_and_Ancient_Near_Eastern_
    Sources_of_the_Armenian_Epic_Washington_D_C_2002?auto=download) 9 July 2021 at the
    Wayback Machine
37. Moses of Chorene,The History of Armenia (http://www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/khorenaci/index.ht
    ml) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20030419093358/http://www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/kh
    orenaci/index.html) 19 April 2003 at the Wayback Machine, Book 1, Ch. 12 (in Russian)
38. History of Armenia by Father Michael Chamich from B.C. 2247 to the Year of Christ 1780, or 1229
    of the Armenian era, Bishop's College Press, Calcutta, 1827, p. 19: "[Aram] was the first to raise the
    Armenian name to any degree of renown; so that contemporary nations... called them the
    Aramians, or followers of Aram, a name which has been corrupted into Armenians; and the country
    they inhabited, by universal consent, took the name of Armenia."
39. "Charles, R.H. (1913). The Book of Jubilees 9:5 from The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the
    Old Testament. Clarendon Press" (http://www.pseudepigrapha.com/jubilees/8.htm).
    www.pseudepigrapha.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180614031249/http://www.pse
    udepigrapha.com/jubilees/8.htm) from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018.
40. "Charles, R.H. (1913). The Book of Jubilees 8:21 from The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the
    Old Testament. Clarendon Press" (https://digitalcommons.andrews.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=
    1003&context=papers). digitalcommons.andrews.edu. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180
    613134227/https://digitalcommons.andrews.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1003&context=papers)
    from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018.
41. Josephus, Flavius. Antiquities of the Jews (https://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseu
    s:text:1999.01.0146:book=1:section=143&highlight=aram). p. Book 1, section 143. Archived (http
    s://web.archive.org/web/20171014101850/http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus:t
    ext:1999.01.0146:book=1:section=143&highlight=aram) from the original on 14 October 2017.
    Retrieved 13 October 2017.
42. Dolukhanov, Pavel; Aslanian, Stepan; Kolpakov, Evgeny; Belyaeva, Elena (2004). "Prehistoric Sites
    in Northern Armenia" (http://www.antiquity.ac.uk/projgall/dolukhanov301/#author). Antiquity. 78
    (301). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170529032337/http://antiquity.ac.uk/projgall/dolukha
    nov301/#author) from the original on 29 May 2017. Retrieved 26 March 2024.
43. Adler, D. S.; Wilkinson, K. N.; Blockley, S.; Mark, D. F.; Pinhasi, R.; Schmidt-Magee, B. A.;
    Nahapetyan, S.; Mallol, C.; Berna, F. (26 September 2014). "Early Levallois technology and the
    Lower to Middle Paleolithic transition in the Southern Caucasus". Science. 345 (6204): 1609–1613.
    Bibcode:2014Sci...345.1609A (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014Sci...345.1609A).
    doi:10.1126/science.1256484 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1256484). ISSN 0036-8075 (http
    s://search.worldcat.org/issn/0036-8075). PMID 25258079 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/252580
    79). S2CID 10266660 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10266660).
44. "325,000 Year Old Stone Age Site In Armenia Leads To Human Technology Rethink" (http://www.sci
    ence20.com/news_articles/325000_year_old_stone_age_site_in_armenia_leads_to_human_techn
    ology_rethink-145698). 28 September 2014. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2021030614261
    4/https://www.science20.com/news_articles/325000_year_old_stone_age_site_in_armenia_leads_t
    o_human_technology_rethink-145698) from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 26 March
    2024.
45. "A View from the Highlands: The History of Shengavit, Armenia in the 4th and 3rd Millennia BCE" (h
    ttps://whitelevy.fas.harvard.edu/view-highlands-history-shengavit-armenia-4th-and-3rd-millennia-bc
    e). The Shelby White and Leon Levy Program for Archaeological Publications. Archived (https://we
    b.archive.org/web/20240511151201/https://whitelevy.fas.harvard.edu/view-highlands-history-sheng
    avit-armenia-4th-and-3rd-millennia-bce) from the original on 11 May 2024. Retrieved 11 May 2024.
46. "10 World's Oldest Things from Armenia" (https://www.peopleofar.com/2014/12/17/10-worlds-oldest
    -things-from-armenia/). 17 December 2014.
47. "Armenian cave yields what may be world's oldest leather shoe" (http://www.cnn.com/2010/WORL
    D/meast/06/09/armenia.old.shoe/). CNN. 9 June 2010. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180
    128074651/http://www.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/meast/06/09/armenia.old.shoe/) from the original on
    28 January 2018. Retrieved 28 January 2018.
48. "5,900-year-old women's skirt discovered in Armenian cave" (https://web.archive.org/web/20171010
    142655/https://news.am/eng/news/73915.html). News Armenia. 13 September 2011. Archived from
    the original (http://news.am/eng/news/73915.html) on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 14 September
    2011.
49. "Earliest Known Winery Found in Armenian Cave" (https://web.archive.org/web/20180108093549/ht
    tps://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2011/01/110111-oldest-wine-press-making-winery-armeni
    a-science-ucla/). National Geographic. 12 January 2011. Archived from the original (https://news.na
    tionalgeographic.com/news/2011/01/110111-oldest-wine-press-making-winery-armenia-science-ucl
    a/) on 8 January 2018. Retrieved 28 January 2018.
50. Greppin, John A. C.; Diakonoff, I. M. (1991). "Some Effects of the Hurro-Urartian People and Their
    Languages upon the Earliest Armenians". Journal of the American Oriental Society. 111 (4): 720–
    730. doi:10.2307/603403 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F603403). ISSN 0003-0279 (https://search.worl
    dcat.org/issn/0003-0279). JSTOR 603403 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/603403).
51. Joan Aruz, Kim Benzel, Jean M. Evans, Beyond Babylon: Art, Trade, and Diplomacy in the Second
    Millennium B.C. Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York, N.Y.)[3] (https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_
    gr5BgOwEJicC/page/n179) (2008) pp. 92
52. Kossian, Aram V. (1997), The Mushki Problem Reconsidered (https://web.archive.org/web/2019082
    9005531/https://docplayer.net/108120425-The-mushki-problem-reconsidered.html), archived from
    the original (https://docplayer.net/108120425-The-mushki-problem-reconsidered.html) on 29 August
    2019, retrieved 31 August 2019 pp. 254
53. Peter I. Bogucki and Pam J. Crabtree Ancient Europe, 8000 B.C. to A.D. 1000: An Encyclopedia of
    the Barbarian World. (http://lukashevichus.info/knigi/ancient_europe_encycl_bogucki_crabtree_1.pd
    f) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160109082658/http://lukashevichus.info/knigi/ancient_eu
    rope_encycl_bogucki_crabtree_1.pdf) 9 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine Charles Scribner's
    Sons, 2004 ISBN 978-0684806686
54. Paul Thieme, The 'Aryan' Gods of the Mitanni Treaties. JAOS 80, 1960, 301-17
55. Petrosyan, Armen (2007). "Towards the Origins of the Armenian People: The Problem of
    Identification of the Proto-Armenians: A Critical Review (in English)" (https://www.academia.edu/365
    7764). Journal for the Society of Armenian Studies. 16: 49–54. Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
    b/20201004180224/https://www.academia.edu/3657764/Towards_the_Origins_of_the_Armenian_P
    eople_The_Problem_of_Identification_of_the_Proto_Armenians_A_Critical_Review_in_English_)
    from the original on 4 October 2020. Retrieved 30 August 2019.
56. Kurkjian, Vahan (1958). History of Armenia (https://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Gazetteer/Plac
    es/Asia/Armenia/_Texts/KURARM/home.html) (1964 ed.). Michigan: Armenian General Benevolent
    Union. Archived (https://archive.today/20120527052930/http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Ga
    zetteer/Places/Asia/Armenia/_Texts/KURARM/home.html) from the original on 27 May 2012.
    Retrieved 22 July 2009.
57. Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia. Yerevan: Armenian Encyclopedia. 1987. p. v. 12.
58. Movsisyan, Artak (2000). Sacred Highland: Armenia in the spiritual conception of the Near East.
    Yerevan.
59. Kavoukjian, Martiros (1982). The Genesis of Armenian People. Montreal.
60. Bournoutian, George A. (2003). A concise history of the Armenian people: (from ancient times to
    the present) (https://archive.org/details/concisehistoryof00geor) (2nd ed.). Costa Mesa, California:
    Mazda Publishers. ISBN 9781568591414.
61. История Востока: в шести томах. Т. 1. Восток в древности / Отв. ред. В. А. Якобсен. — М.:
    Вост. лит., 1997. — 688 с. — ISBN 5-02-017936-1. Раздел «Закавказье и сопредельные страны
    в период эллинизма (http://gumilevica.kulichki.net/HE1/he129.htm#he129para1) Archived (https://
    web.archive.org/web/20150712015334/http://gumilevica.kulichki.net/HE1/he129.htm#he129para1)
    2015-07-12 at the Wayback Machine»
62. "Report on the Activities on the national standardization of the names of geographical objects of the
    Republic of Armenia" (https://unstats.un.org/unsd/ungegn/sessions/3rd_session_2023/documents/
    GEGN.2_2023_97_CRP97.pdf) (PDF). United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names.
    Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240511151605/https://unstats.un.org/unsd/ungegn/session
    s/3rd_session_2023/documents/GEGN.2_2023_97_CRP97.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 11 May
    2024. Retrieved 11 May 2024.
63. Svenska forskningsinstitutet i Istanbul (1993). Lennart Rydén; Jan Olof Rosenqvist (eds.). Aspects
    of Late Antiquity and Early Byzantium: Papers Read at a Colloquium Held at the Swedish Research
    Institute in Istanbul 31 May-5 June, 1992. Swedish Research Institute. ISBN 9789186884055.
    OCLC 1131566057 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/1131566057).
64. Joshua J. Mark. "Assyria" (https://www.worldhistory.org/assyria/). World History Encyclopedia.
    Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073851/https://www.worldhistory.org/assyria/) from
    the original on 16 April 2021. Retrieved 13 May 2013.
65. Charles W. Hartley; G. Bike Yazicioğlu; Adam T. Smith, eds. (2012). The Archaeology of Power and
    Politics in Eurasia: Regimes and Revolutions. Cambridge University Press. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-107-
    01652-1. "...the unique temple-tomb at Garni, just east of Yerevan – the only Greco-Roman
    colonnaded building anywhere in the Soviet Union."
66. Melton, J.G.; Baumann, M. (2010). Religions of the World: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia of
    Beliefs and Practices [6 volumes] (https://books.google.com/books?id=qejaEAAAQBAJ&pg=PA47
    0). Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 470. ISBN 978-1-59884-204-3. Retrieved 11 May 2024.
67. "The World Factbook: Armenia" (https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/armenia/). CIA.
    Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210104184358/https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/cou
    ntries/armenia/) from the original on 4 January 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2007.
68. Brunner, Borgna (2006). Time Almanac with Information Please 2007 (https://archive.org/details/tim
    ealmanac2007w00brun/page/685). New York: Time Home Entertainment. p. 685 (https://archive.or
    g/details/timealmanac2007w00brun/page/685). ISBN 978-1-933405-49-0.
69. Mary Boyce. Zoroastrians: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices (https://books.google.com/books?i
    d=a6gbxVfjtUEC&pg=PA84) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20150919131431/https://books.
    google.com/books?id=a6gbxVfjtUEC&pg=PA84) 19 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine
    Psychology Press, 2001 ISBN 0-415-23902-8 p. 84
70. Ohannes Geukjian (13 May 2016). Ethnicity, Nationalism and Conflict in the South Caucasus:
    Nagorno-Karabakh and the Legacy of Soviet Nationalities Policy (https://books.google.com/books?i
    d=E_AoDAAAQBAJ&pg=PA30). Routledge. pp. 30–. ISBN 978-1-317-14074-0.
71. Razmik Panossian (27 May 2006). The Armenians: From Kings and Priests to Merchants and
    Commissars (https://books.google.com/books?id=cEL-CuhdWU4C&pg=PA48). Columbia University
    Press. pp. 48–. ISBN 978-0-231-51133-9. OCLC 1017996521 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/101
    7996521).
72. Stokes, Jamie, ed. (2008). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East. New York:
    Infobase Publishing. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-4381-2676-0. "Etchmiatzin is located in the west of modern
    Armenia, close to the border with Turkey, and its fourth-century cathedral is generally regarded as
    the oldest in the world."
73. Bauer-Manndorff, Elisabeth (1981). Armenia: Past and Present. Lucerne: Reich Verlag.
    OCLC 8063377 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/8063377). "Etchmiadzin, with the world's oldest
    cathedral and the seat of the Catholicos, draws tourists from all over the world."
74. Utudjian, Édouard (1968). Armenian Architecture: fourth to 17th Century. Paris: Editions A.
    Morancé. p. 7. OCLC 464421 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/464421). "...the oldest cathedral in
    Christendom, that of Etchmiadzin, founded in the fourth century."
75. Canard & Cahen 1960.
76. S. Payaslian (13 March 2008). The History of Armenia: From the Origins to the Present (https://boo
    ks.google.com/books?id=UMIWDAAAQBAJ&pg=PA52). Springer. pp. 52–. ISBN 978-0-230-60858-
    0. OCLC 1001334466 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/1001334466).
77. Holt, Peter Malcolm; Lambton, Ann Katharine Swynford & Lewis, Bernard (1977). The Cambridge
    History of Islam. pp. 231–32.
78. Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York, N.Y.); N. Y.) Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York; Speros
    P. (jr.) Vryonis; Thomas F. Mathews; Jeffrey C. Anderson; Annemarie Weyl Carr; Henry Maguire;
    Robert G. Ousterhout; Ioli Kalavrezou; Eunice Dauterman Maguire; Olenka Z. Pevny; Joseph D.
    Alchermes; S. Peter Cowe; Thelma K. Thomas; Jaroslav Folda; Priscilla Soucek (1997). Helen C.
    Evans; William D. Wixom; William D.. Wixom (eds.). The Glory of Byzantium: Art and Culture of the
    Middle Byzantine Era, A.D. 843-1261 (https://books.google.com/books?id=Caqa12aj55wC&pg=PA3
    61). Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. 361–. ISBN 978-0-87099-777-8. OCLC 1008249298 (https://s
    earch.worldcat.org/oclc/1008249298).
79. Ghazarian, J.G. (2000). The Armenian Kingdom in Cilicia During the Crusades: The Integration of
    Cilician Armenians with the Latins, 1080-1393 (https://books.google.com/books?id=3W89PVbKLZw
    C&pg=PA23). Caucasus world. Curzon. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-7007-1418-6. Retrieved 11 May 2024.
80. Richard G. Hovannisian (11 February 2004). The Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Times:
    Volume I: The Dynastic Periods: From Antiquity to the Fourteenth Century (https://archive.org/detail
    s/armenianpeoplefr00rich_0/page/57/mode/2up). Palgrave Macmillan US. p. 57. ISBN 978-1-4039-
    6422-9. OCLC 805125065 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/805125065).
81. Richard G. Hovannisian (11 February 2004). The Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Times:
    Volume I: The Dynastic Periods: From Antiquity to the Fourteenth Century. Palgrave Macmillan US.
    pp. 23–31. ISBN 978-1-4039-6422-9. OCLC 805125065 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/80512506
    5).
82. Rayfield, Donald (2013). Edge of Empires: A History of Georgia (https://books.google.com/books?id
    =PxQpmg_JIpwC&pg=PA165). Reaktion Books. p. 165. ISBN 978-1-78023-070-2. Archived (https://
    web.archive.org/web/20170205172633/https://books.google.com/books?id=PxQpmg_JIpwC&pg=P
    A165) from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 28 November 2016.
83. Ward, Steven R. (2014). Immortal, Updated Edition: A Military History of Iran and Its Armed Forces
    (https://books.google.com/books?id=MOuVAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA43). Georgetown University Press.
    p. 43. ISBN 978-1-62616-032-3. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170205171942/https://bo
    oks.google.com/books?id=MOuVAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA43) from the original on 5 February 2017.
    Retrieved 28 November 2016.
84. Herzig, Edmund; Kurkchiyan, Marina (2004). The Armenians: Past and Present in the Making of
    National Identity (https://books.google.com/books?id=B8WRAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA47). Routledge.
    p. 47. ISBN 978-1-135-79837-6. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170111210219/https://bo
    oks.google.com/books?id=B8WRAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA47) from the original on 11 January 2017.
    Retrieved 28 November 2016.
85. H. Nahavandi, Y. Bomati, Shah Abbas, empereur de Perse (1587–1629) (Perrin, Paris, 1998)
86. Mikaberidze, Alexander (2011). Conflict and Conquest in the Islamic World: A Historical
    Encyclopedia (https://books.google.com/books?id=jBBYD2J2oE4C&pg=PA351). ABC-CLIO. pp. 33,
    351. ISBN 978-1-59884-337-8. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170205173031/https://book
    s.google.com/books?id=jBBYD2J2oE4C&pg=PA351) from the original on 5 February 2017.
    Retrieved 28 November 2016.
87. Dowling, Timothy C. (2014). Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya,
    and Beyond [2 volumes] (https://books.google.com/books?id=KTq2BQAAQBAJ&pg=PA728). ABC-
    CLIO. pp. 728–. ISBN 978-1-59884-948-6. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170208103437/
    https://books.google.com/books?id=KTq2BQAAQBAJ&pg=PA728) from the original on 8 February
    2017. Retrieved 28 November 2016.
 88. Minahan, James (2010). The complete guide to national symbols and emblems (https://books.googl
     e.com/books?id=jfrWCQAAQBAJ). Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood Press. p. 310. ISBN 978-0-
     313-34497-8. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20151025182604/https://books.google.com/bo
     oks?id=jfrWCQAAQBAJ) from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2015.
 89. Kirakosian, J. S. (1972). Hayastane michazkayin divanakitut'yan ew sovetakan artakin
     kaghakakanut'yan pastateghterum, 1828–1923 [Armenia in the documents of international
     diplomacy and Soviet foreign policy, 1828–1923] (in Armenian). Yerevan. pp. 149–358.
 90. Kifner, John (9 April 2018). "Armenian Genocide of 1915: An Overview" (https://archive.nytimes.co
     m/www.nytimes.com/ref/timestopics/topics_armeniangenocide.html?onwardjourney=584162_v1).
     New York Times. Retrieved 11 May 2024.
 91. Akçam, Taner (4 May 2023). "The Armenian Genocide". The Cambridge World History of Genocide.
     Cambridge University Press. pp. 67–92. doi:10.1017/9781108767118.004 (https://doi.org/10.1017%
     2F9781108767118.004). ISBN 978-1-108-76711-8.
 92. Kieser, Hans-Lukas; Schaller, Dominik J. (2002), Der Völkermord an den Armeniern und die Shoah
     [The Armenian genocide and the Shoah] (in German), Chronos, p. 114, ISBN 978-3-0340-0561-6
 93. Walker, Christopher J. (1980), Armenia: The Survival of A Nation, London: Croom Helm, pp. 200–
     03
 94. "Extensive bibliography by University of Michigan on the Armenian genocide" (http://webarchive.loc.
     gov/all/20011116212954/http://www.umd.umich.edu/dept/armenian/facts/gen_bib1.html).
     Umd.umich.edu. Archived from the original (http://www.umd.umich.edu/dept/armenian/facts/gen_bib
     1.html) on 16 November 2001. Retrieved 30 December 2010.
 95. "Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Resolution" (http://www.armenian-genocide.org/Affirma
     tion.153/current_category.7/affirmation_detail.html). Armenian genocide. Archived (https://web.archi
     ve.org/web/20160303171925/http://www.armenian-genocide.org/Affirmation.153/current_category.
     7/affirmation_detail.html) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2016.
 96. Ferguson, Niall (2006). The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the
     West (https://archive.org/details/warofworldtwenti00nial/page/177). New York: Penguin Press.
     p. 177 (https://archive.org/details/warofworldtwenti00nial/page/177). ISBN 978-1-59420-100-4.
 97. Robert Melson, Revolution and Genocide: On the Origins of the Armenian genocide and the
     Holocaust, University of Chicago Press, 15 October 1992, p. 147
 98. Q&A: Armenian genocide dispute (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/6045182.stm) Archived (http
     s://web.archive.org/web/20070301211630/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/6045182.stm) 1 March
     2007 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. 10 July 2008.
 99. "Tsitsernakaberd Memorial Complex" (http://www.genocide-museum.am/eng/Description_and_histo
     ry.php). Armenian Genocide Museum-Institute. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160120092
     829/http://www.genocide-museum.am/eng/Description_and_history.php) from the original on 20
     January 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2016.
100. Vartan Matiossian (23 September 2021). The Politics of Naming the Armenian Genocide:
     Language, History and 'Medz Yeghern' (https://books.google.com/books?id=-j9DEAAAQBAJ&pg=P
     A125). Bloomsbury Publishing. pp. 125–. ISBN 978-0-7556-4109-3. OCLC 1247655673 (https://sea
     rch.worldcat.org/oclc/1247655673).
101. Hille, Charlotte Mathilde Louise (2010). State Building and Conflict Resolution in the Caucasus (http
     s://archive.org/details/statebuildingcon00hill). Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. p. 151 (https://archive.org/d
     etails/statebuildingcon00hill/page/n165). ISBN 978-90-04-17901-1.
102. Zarifian, J. (2024). The United States and the Armenian Genocide: History, Memory, Politics (http
     s://books.google.com/books?id=oT8DEQAAQBAJ&pg=PP29). Genocide, Political Violence, Human
     Rights. Rutgers University Press. p. 29. ISBN 978-1-9788-3794-2. Retrieved 11 May 2024.
103. Herzig, E.; Kurkchiyan, M. (2004). The Armenians: Past and Present in the Making of National
     Identity (https://books.google.com/books?id=B8WRAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA98). Caucasus World:
     Peoples of the Caucasus. Taylor & Francis. p. 98. ISBN 978-1-135-79837-6. Retrieved 11 May
     2024.
104. Hovannisian, Richard G. (1968). "The Allies and Armenia, 1915-18". Journal of Contemporary
     History. 3 (1). Sage Publications, Ltd.: 145–168. doi:10.1177/002200946800300108 (https://doi.org/
     10.1177%2F002200946800300108). ISSN 0022-0094 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0022-0094).
     JSTOR 259971 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/259971).
105. Arhire, S.; Roşu, T. (2019). The Paris Peace Conference (1919-1920) and Its Aftermath:
     Settlements, Problems and Perceptions (https://books.google.com/books?id=WBHCDwAAQBAJ&p
     g=PA254). Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 254. ISBN 978-1-5275-4395-9. Retrieved 11 May
     2024.
106. Hovannisian, Richard, and Simon Payaslian. Armenian Cilicia. Costa Mesa: Mazda Publishers, Inc.,
     2008. 483. Print.
107. Grote, R.; Röder, T.J. (2016). Constitutionalism, Human Rights, and Islam after the Arab Spring (htt
     ps://books.google.com/books?id=YEi1DAAAQBAJ&pg=PA481). Oxford University Press. p. 481.
     ISBN 978-0-19-062765-2. Retrieved 11 May 2024.
108. Richard Pipes (25 April 1997). The Formation of the Soviet Union: Communism and Nationalism,
     1917-1923, First Edition (https://books.google.com/books?id=IVgwEAAAQBAJ&pg=PT167).
     Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-41764-9. OCLC 1259423784 (https://search.worldcat.or
     g/oclc/1259423784).
109. "The Soviet Period – History – Azerbaijan – Asia" (http://www.countriesquest.com/asia/azerbaijan/hi
     story/the_soviet_period.htm). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20110929150339/http://www.co
     untriesquest.com/asia/azerbaijan/history/the_soviet_period.htm) from the original on 29 September
     2011. Retrieved 25 July 2011.
110. Закавказская федерация (https://web.archive.org/web/20150925080238/http://bse.chemport.ru/za
     kavkazskaya_federatsiya.shtml). Большая советская энциклопедия, 3-е изд., гл. ред. А. М.
     Прохоров. Москва: Советская энциклопедия, 1972. Т. 9 (A. M. Prokhorov; et al., eds. (1972).
     "Transcaucasian Federation". Great Soviet Encyclopedia (in Russian). Vol. 9. Moscow: Soviet
     Encyclopedia.)
111. C. Mouradian, L'Armenie sovietique, pp. 278–79
112. "Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic (http://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/Azerbaijan+Soviet
     +Socialist+Republic) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20111103114602/http://encyclopedia2.t
     hefreedictionary.com/Azerbaijan+Soviet+Socialist+Republic) 3 November 2011 at the Wayback
     Machine". The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1979).
113. Naegele, Jolyon (9 April 2008). "Azerbaijan: Armenians and Azerbaijanis Remember Suffering" (http
     s://archive.today/20201220163702/https://www.rferl.org/a/1088062.html). Radio Free Europe/Radio
     Liberty. Archived from the original (https://www.rferl.org/a/1088062.html) on 20 December 2020.
     Retrieved 11 January 2021.
114. Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia 2004. p. 74 by Imogen Gladman, Taylor & Francis Group
115. Notes from Baku: Black January (http://www.eurasianet.org/departments/rights/articles/pp021603.s
     html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090827072157/http://www.eurasianet.org/department
     s/rights/articles/pp021603.shtml) 27 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Rufat Ahmedov.
     EurasiaNet Human Rights.
116. "The March Referendum" (https://web.archive.org/web/20061015092843/http://www.soviethistory.or
     g/index.php?action=L2&SubjectID=1991march&Year=1991). Archived from the original (http://soviet
     history.org/index.php?action=L2&SubjectID=1991march&Year=1991) on 15 October 2006.
     Retrieved 10 November 2008.
117. Croissant, Michael P. (1998). The Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict: Causes and Implications (https://arc
     hive.org/details/armeniaazerbaija00croi). London: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-96241-8.
118. "The Ties That Divide" (https://web.archive.org/web/20060820170846/http://www.globalheritagefun
     d.org/news/GHF_in_the_news/economist_ties_that_divide_june_17_06.asp). Global Heritage
     Fund. 17 June 2006. Archived from the original (http://www.globalheritagefund.org/news/GHF_in_th
     e_news/economist_ties_that_divide_june_17_06.asp) on 20 August 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
119. De Waal, Thomas (2004). Black Garden: Armenia And Azerbaijan Through Peace and War (https://
     books.google.com/books?id=jycTCgAAQBAJ&pg=PA240). New York: New York University Press.
     p. 240. ISBN 978-0-8147-1945-9.
120. A Conflict That Can Be Resolved in Time: Nagorno-Karabakh (http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/p
     ublication/1283/conflict_that_can_be_resolved_in_time.html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/
     20081001192200/http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/publication/1283/conflict_that_can_be_resolve
     d_in_time.html) 1 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine. International Herald Tribune. 29
     November 2003.
121. "Heritage Index of Economic Freedom" (https://web.archive.org/web/20230929071128/https://www.
     heritage.org/index/country/armenia). The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original (https://he
     ritage.org/index/country/armenia) on 29 September 2023. Retrieved 22 June 2023.
122. "EU negotiations with Armenia and Georgia on Free Trade Agreements successfully concluded" (htt
     ps://web.archive.org/web/20160120092829/http://www.eppgroup.eu/press-release/Georgia-and-Ar
     menia:-EU-reaches-trade-deal). EPP Group. Archived from the original (http://eppgroup.eu/press-re
     lease/Georgia-and-Armenia%3A-EU-reaches-trade-deal) on 20 January 2016. Retrieved
     10 February 2016.
123. "Armenia will significantly increase its revenues by reinforcing its role of a transit country between
     Europe, CIS and Middle East" (http://arka.am/en/news/interview/armenia_will_significantly_increas
     e_its_revenues_by_reinforcing_its_role_of_a_transit_country_betwee/). Arka News Agency. 28
     March 2013. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160216041554/http://arka.am/en/news/intervi
     ew/armenia_will_significantly_increase_its_revenues_by_reinforcing_its_role_of_a_transit_country
     _betwee/) from the original on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2016.
124. "Europe Could Draw Gas Through Iran–Armenia Pipeline" (https://web.archive.org/web/201602170
     42353/http://eurodialogue.eu/676). European dialogue. Archived from the original (http://eurodialog
     ue.eu/676) on 17 February 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2016.
125. " "Velvet Revolution" Takes Armenia into the Unknown" (https://www.crisisgroup.org/europe-central-
     asia/caucasus/armenia/velvet-revolution-takes-armenia-unknown). Crisis Group. 20 November
     2020. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180426124258/https://www.crisisgroup.org/europe-c
     entral-asia/caucasus/armenia/velvet-revolution-takes-armenia-unknown) from the original on 26
     April 2018. Retrieved 21 November 2020.
126. "Armenia: Armen Sarkissian elected into new, less powerful presidential role | DW | 02.03.2018" (htt
     ps://www.dw.com/en/armenia-armen-sarkissian-elected-into-new-less-powerful-presidential-role/a-4
     2797330). Deutsche Welle. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180418050344/https://www.d
     w.com/en/armenia-armen-sarkissian-elected-into-new-less-powerful-presidential-role/a-42797330)
     from the original on 18 April 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2021.
127. "Pashinyan elected as Armenia's new prime minister" (https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2018/5/8/ar
     menia-nikol-pashinyan-elected-as-new-prime-minister). Al Jazeera. Archived (https://web.archive.or
     g/web/20210109132248/https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2018/5/8/armenia-nikol-pashinyan-electe
     d-as-new-prime-minister) from the original on 9 January 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021.
128. "Fighting over Nagorno-Karabakh goes on despite US mediation" (https://apnews.com/article/europ
     e-azerbaijan-armenia-41a103bcde14fa8b28968000d7992b84). Associated Press. 24 October
     2020. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230404032113/https://apnews.com/article/europe-az
     erbaijan-armenia-41a103bcde14fa8b28968000d7992b84) from the original on 4 April 2023.
     Retrieved 15 November 2020.
129. "Fury and celebrations as Russia brokers peace deal to end Nagorno-Karabakh war" (https://www.i
     ndependent.co.uk/news/world/europe/russia-armenia-azerbaijan-war-fighting-peace-deal-b172021
     9.html). The Independent. 11 November 2020. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230404091
     111/https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/russia-armenia-azerbaijan-war-fighting-peac
     e-deal-b1720219.html) from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2020.
130. "Armenians vent fury at West after truce in bloody war in Nagorno-Karabakh" (https://www.cbc.ca/n
     ews/world/armenia-azerbaijan-nagorno-karabakh-truce-1.5796470). CBC News. 11 November
     2020. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230405035231/https://www.cbc.ca/news/world/arme
     nia-azerbaijan-nagorno-karabakh-truce-1.5796470) from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved
     15 November 2020.
131. "Nikol Pashinyan officially appointed Armenia's prime minister" (https://www.newindianexpress.com/
     world/2021/aug/02/nikol-pashinyan-officially-appointed-armenias-prime-minister-2339082.html).
     The New Indian Express. 2 August 2021. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20211220082131/h
     ttps://www.newindianexpress.com/world/2021/aug/02/nikol-pashinyan-officially-appointed-armenias
     -prime-minister-2339082.html) from the original on 20 December 2021. Retrieved 20 December
     2021.
132. "Armenian president resigns over lack of influence" (https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/1/23/ar
     menian-president-armen-sarkissian-resigns). www.aljazeera.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
     web/20230404120554/https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/1/23/armenian-president-armen-sarki
     ssian-resigns) from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 8 February 2022.
133. "Vahagn Khachaturyan elected new Armenian president" (https://www.aa.com.tr/en/politics/vahagn-
     khachaturyan-elected-new-armenian-president/2522507). www.aa.com.tr. Archived (https://web.arc
     hive.org/web/20221015154740/https://www.aa.com.tr/en/politics/vahagn-khachaturyan-elected-new
     -armenian-president/2522507) from the original on 15 October 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022.
134. Wesolowsky, Tony (7 May 2022). "Facing Mass Protests Calling For Him To Resign, Armenia's
     Prime Minister Is Running Out Of Options" (https://www.rferl.org/a/armenia-pashinian-karabakh-opti
     ons-protests/31837928.html). Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Archived (https://web.archive.org/w
     eb/20230404120554/https://www.rferl.org/a/armenia-pashinian-karabakh-options-protests/3183792
     8.html) from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 7 May 2022.
135. "Armenia, Azerbaijan: Baku Launches Military Operation In Nagorno-Karabakh" (https://archive.tod
     ay/20230919182727/https://worldview.stratfor.com/situation-report/armenia-azerbaijan-baku-launch
     es-military-operation-nagorno-karabakh). Stratfor. 19 September 2023. Archived from the original (h
     ttps://worldview.stratfor.com/situation-report/armenia-azerbaijan-baku-launches-military-operation-n
     agorno-karabakh) on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2023. "...the Russian
     peacekeeping contingent is incapable of preventing Azerbaijan's seizure of the region, despite this
     being a clear violation of the November 2020 ceasefire brokered by Russia that ended the last war."
136. "Joint statement on Azerbaijan's attack on Nagorno-Karabakh" (https://www.europarl.europa.eu/del
     egations/en/joint-statement-on-azerbaijan-s-attack-o/product-details/20230919DPU37422).
     European Parliament. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230922111407/https://www.europar
     l.europa.eu/delegations/en/joint-statement-on-azerbaijan-s-attack-o/product-details/20230919DPU3
     7422) from the original on 22 September 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "We condemn in the
     strongest terms today's pre-planned and unjustified attack of Azerbaijan against Nagorno-
     Karabakh...We recall that the attack takes place in the context of a major humanitarian crisis in
     Nagorno-Karabakh, following Azerbaijan's blockade of the Lachin Corridor for the past nine months,
     in violation of Baku's commitments under the ceasefire statement of 9 November 2020 and of the
     legally binding orders of the International Court of Justice. Humanitarian access to Nagorno-
     Karabakh needs to be fully and permanently restored."
137. "Azerbaijani forces strike Armenian-controlled Karabakh, raising risk of new Caucasus war" (https://
     www.reuters.com/world/azerbaijan-says-six-its-citizens-were-killed-by-land-mines-karabakh-2023-0
     9-19/). Reuters. 19 September 2023. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230919114910/http
     s://www.reuters.com/world/azerbaijan-says-six-its-citizens-were-killed-by-land-mines-karabakh-202
     3-09-19/) from the original on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 19 September 2023.
138. Ilyushina, Mary (19 September 2023). "Fighting flares between Azerbaijan and Armenia in Nagorno-
     Karabakh" (https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/09/19/nagorno-karabakh-azerbaijan-arme
     nia/). The Washington Post. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230919200531/https://www.w
     ashingtonpost.com/world/2023/09/19/nagorno-karabakh-azerbaijan-armenia/) from the original on
     19 September 2023. Retrieved 19 September 2023. "Azerbaijan and Armenia have repeatedly
     clashed over Nagorno-Karabakh, which is internationally recognized as part of Azerbaijan but
     largely populated by ethnic Armenians and largely governed by the unrecognized Republic of
     Artsakh."
139. Roth, Andrew (19 September 2023). "Azerbaijan launches 'anti-terrorist' campaign in disputed
     Nagorno-Karabakh region" (https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/sep/19/azerbaijan-launches-a
     nti-terrorist-campaign-in-disputed-nagorno-karabakh-region). The Guardian. Archived (https://web.a
     rchive.org/web/20230919111008/https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/sep/19/azerbaijan-launc
     hes-anti-terrorist-campaign-in-disputed-nagorno-karabakh-region) from the original on 19
     September 2023. Retrieved 19 September 2023.
140. "Russian-mediated ceasefire announced in Nagorno-Karabakh" (https://armenpress.am/eng/news/1
     120051.html). Armenpress. 20 September 2023. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/202310190
     71651/https://armenpress.am/eng/news/1120051.html) from the original on 19 October 2023.
     Retrieved 2 October 2023.
141. "Ethnic Armenians accept Russia ceasefire plan after Azerbaijan offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh" (h
     ttps://edition.cnn.com/2023/09/20/asia/nagorno-karabakh-russia-ceasefire-intl/index.html). CNN. 20
     September 2023. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230920132915/https://edition.cnn.com/2
     023/09/20/asia/nagorno-karabakh-russia-ceasefire-intl/index.html) from the original on 20
     September 2023. Retrieved 20 September 2023.
142. "BREAKING: Stepanakert to disband army in ceasefire deal" (https://www.civilnet.am/en/news/7511
     12/breaking-stepanakert-to-disband-army-in-ceasefire-deal/). CIVILNET. 20 September 2023.
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230920132923/https://www.civilnet.am/en/news/751112/br
     eaking-stepanakert-to-disband-army-in-ceasefire-deal/) from the original on 20 September 2023.
     Retrieved 20 September 2023.
143. "МВД Нагорного Карабаха обвинило Азербайджан в нарушении договора о прекращении
     огня" (https://meduza.io/news/2023/09/21/mvd-nagornogo-karabaha-obvinilo-azerbaydzhan-v-naru
     shenii-dogovora-o-prekraschenii-ognya). Meduza. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230921
     113954/https://meduza.io/news/2023/09/21/mvd-nagornogo-karabaha-obvinilo-azerbaydzhan-v-nar
     ushenii-dogovora-o-prekraschenii-ognya) from the original on 21 September 2023. Retrieved
     21 September 2023.
144. "Aserbaidschan soll Waffenruhe gebrochen haben" (https://rp-online.de/politik/ausland/berg-karaba
     ch-aserbaidschan-soll-waffenruhe-gebrochen-haben_aid-98086627). Rheinische Post. 21
     September 2023. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230921114231/https://rp-online.de/politi
     k/ausland/berg-karabach-aliyev-entschuldigt-sich-fuer-tod-russischer-soldaten_aid-98086627) from
     the original on 21 September 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023.
145. Moreno Ocampo, Luis (22 September 2023). "Call what is happening in Nagorno-Karabakh by its
     proper name" (https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/09/22/nagorno-karabakh-genocide-
     armenia/). The Washington Post. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230922173112/https://w
     ww.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/09/22/nagorno-karabakh-genocide-armenia/) from the
     original on 22 September 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2023.
146. Central Intelligence Agency (2014). The CIA World Factbook 2015 (https://books.google.com/book
     s?id=xutfBgAAQBAJ&pg=PT5241). Skyhorse Publishing. p. 5241. ISBN 978-1-62914-903-5.
147. Dinerstein, Eric; Olson, David; Joshi, Anup; Vynne, Carly; Burgess, Neil D.; Wikramanayake, Eric;
     Hahn, Nathan; Palminteri, Suzanne; Hedao, Prashant; Noss, Reed; Hansen, Matt; Locke, Harvey;
     Ellis, Erle C; Jones, Benjamin; Barber, Charles Victor; Hayes, Randy; Kormos, Cyril; Martin, Vance;
     Crist, Eileen; Sechrest, Wes; Price, Lori; Baillie, Jonathan E. M.; Weeden, Don; Suckling, Kierán;
     Davis, Crystal; Sizer, Nigel; Moore, Rebecca; Thau, David; Birch, Tanya; Potapov, Peter;
     Turubanova, Svetlana; Tyukavina, Alexandra; de Souza, Nadia; Pintea, Lilian; Brito, José C.;
     Llewellyn, Othman A.; Miller, Anthony G.; Patzelt, Annette; Ghazanfar, Shahina A.; Timberlake,
     Jonathan; Klöser, Heinz; Shennan-Farpón, Yara; Kindt, Roeland; Lillesø, Jens-Peter Barnekow; van
     Breugel, Paulo; Graudal, Lars; Voge, Maianna; Al-Shammari, Khalaf F.; Saleem, Muhammad
     (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" (https://www.ncbi.n
     lm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5451287). BioScience. 67 (6): 534–545. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix014 (htt
     ps://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbiosci%2Fbix014). ISSN 0006-3568 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0006-
     3568). PMC 5451287 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5451287). PMID 28608869 (h
     ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28608869).
148. "Geographic Characteristic of The Republic of Armenia" (http://www.armstat.am/file/article/marz_07
     _e_2.pdf) (PDF). Marzes of the Republic of Armenia in Figures, 2002–2006. National Statistical
     Service of the Republic of Armenia. 2007. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090325034102/
     http://www.armstat.am/file/article/marz_07_e_2.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 25 March 2009.
     Retrieved 22 July 2009.
149. "Percentage of Mountain Area per Country (map)" (https://farm1.staticflickr.com/779/30949572663_
     37d588c515_o.jpg). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190109155517/https://farm1.staticflick
     r.com/779/30949572663_37d588c515_o.jpg) from the original on 9 January 2019.
150. Natasha May Azarian (2007). The Seeds of Memory: Narrative Renditions of the Armenian
     genocide Across Generations (https://books.google.com/books?id=QJDLYMq7ZuAC&pg=PA96).
     p. 96. ISBN 978-0-549-53005-3. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130528131920/http://boo
     ks.google.com/books?id=QJDLYMq7ZuAC&pg=PA96) from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved
     28 April 2013. "Mount Ararat is considered the 'heart' of historical Armenia as it is Armenian folklore
     which considers the majestic mountain to be the place where Noah's Arc landed. Armenian
     businesses, households, and schools almost ubiquitously have at ..."
151. Rouben Paul Adalian (13 May 2010). Historical Dictionary of Armenia (https://books.google.com/bo
     oks?id=QS-vSjHObOYC&pg=PA85). Scarecrow Press. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-8108-7450-3. Archived
     (https://web.archive.org/web/20130528164521/http://books.google.com/books?id=QS-vSjHObOYC
     &pg=PA85) from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 28 April 2013. "Although the mythology
     associated with the pagan worship of the mountain is now lost to popular belief, Mount Ararat has
     played a very ..."
152. James Minahan (1998). Miniature empires: a historical dictionary of the newly independent states
     (https://books.google.com/books?id=RSxt-JB-PDkC&pg=PA2). Greenwood Publishing Group.
     pp. 2–3. ISBN 978-0-313-30610-5. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130528125621/http://b
     ooks.google.com/books?id=RSxt-JB-PDkC&pg=PA2) from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved
     28 April 2013. "Mount Ararat, the legendary landing place of Noah's Ark, is located in what is now
     modern Turkey. Situated near the border, the peak is visible from nearly every area of Armenia.
     Historically, the mountain has been the Armenian people's most ..."
153. Beck, Hylke E.; Zimmermann, Niklaus E.; McVicar, Tim R.; Vergopolan, Noemi; Berg, Alexis; Wood,
     Eric F. (30 October 2018). "Present and future Köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km
     resolution" (https://www.research-collection.ethz.ch/bitstream/20.500.11850/302311/2/sdata201821
     4.pdf) (PDF). Scientific Data. 5 (1): 180214. Bibcode:2018NatSD...580214B (https://ui.adsabs.harva
     rd.edu/abs/2018NatSD...580214B). doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.214 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fsdata.
     2018.214). PMC 6207062 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6207062).
     PMID 30375988 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30375988). Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
     b/20201004180229/https://bitstream/handle/20.500.11850/302311/sdata2018214.pdf;jsessionid=65
     665A2C93110E4FCFCF1D01F6392834?sequence=2) from the original on 4 October 2020.
     Retrieved 6 September 2019.
154. "Environmental Performance Index" (https://web.archive.org/web/20191016193854/https://epi.envir
     ocenter.yale.edu/epi-country-report/ARM). epi.envirocenter.yale.edu. Archived from the original (htt
     ps://epi.envirocenter.yale.edu/epi-country-report/ARM) on 16 October 2019. Retrieved 2 February
     2018.
155. Terms and Definitions FRA 2025 Forest Resources Assessment, Working Paper 194 (https://openk
     nowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/a6e225da-4a31-4e06-818d-ca3aeadfd635/content).
     Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2023.
156. "Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020, Armenia" (https://fra-data.fao.org/assessments/fra/20
     20/ARM/home/overview). Food Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
157. " "We have good reasons to boast economic growth in the coming years" – Karen Karapetyan
     Pleased with 2017 Indices in Kotayk Marz" (https://web.archive.org/web/20180216204522/http://ww
     w.gov.am/en/news/item/9338/). www.gov.am. Archived from the original (http://www.gov.am/en/new
     s/item/9338/) on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018.
158. "EU: Armenia nuclear plant should be shut down as soon as possible" (https://web.archive.org/web/
     20180216204447/https://news.am/eng/news/433776.html). news.am. Archived from the original (htt
     ps://news.am/eng/news/433776.html) on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018.
159. "Modernization to increase the capacity of Armenian nuclear power plant by 10%" (http://arka.am/e
     n/news/technology/modernization_to_increase_the_capacity_of_armenian_nuclear_power_plant_b
     y_10/). arka.am. 13 February 2018. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180216143937/http://a
     rka.am/en/news/technology/modernization_to_increase_the_capacity_of_armenian_nuclear_power
     _plant_by_10/) from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018.
160. "Armenian Nuclear Power Plant upgrading program to continue in 2018" (https://web.archive.org/we
     b/20180216204336/https://armenpress.am/eng/news/922486/armenian-nuclear-power-plant-upgrad
     ing-program-to-continue-in-2018.html). armenpress.am. Archived from the original (https://armenpre
     ss.am/eng/news/922486/armenian-nuclear-power-plant-upgrading-program-to-continue-in-2018.ht
     ml) on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018.
161. Fischer Weltalmanach 2019- Zahlen Daten Fakten. Frankfurt am Main: Fischer. 1 July 2018. p. 45.
     ISBN 978-3-596-72019-4.
162. "Global Data | Fragile States Index" (https://fragilestatesindex.org/data/). fragilestatesindex.org.
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190715052132/https://fragilestatesindex.org/data/) from
     the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2019.
163. "Armenia 1995 (rev. 2005) Constitution - Constitute" (https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/
     Armenia_2005?lang=en). www.constituteproject.org. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201504
     02150549/https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/Armenia_2005?lang=en) from the original
     on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 25 February 2022.
164. "Archive —" (https://aceproject.org/electoral-advice/archive/CDCountry?set_language=en&topic=V
     R&country=AM). aceproject.org. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220225172910/https://ac
     eproject.org/electoral-advice/archive/CDCountry?set_language=en&topic=VR&country=AM) from
     the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2022.
165. "Armenia invited as observer for Arab League" (http://azad-hye.blogspot.ca/2005/01/observer-statu
     s-for-armenia-in-arab.html). Azad Hye. 19 January 2005. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201
     70421002247/http://azad-hye.blogspot.ca/2005/01/observer-status-for-armenia-in-arab.html) from
     the original on 21 April 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2014.
166. Leblanc, Daniel (9 October 2018). "Prime Minister Trudeau has last shot to help Michaëlle Jean
     stay on as Francophonie leader" (https://www.theglobeandmail.com/politics/article-prime-minister-tr
     udeau-has-last-shot-to-help-michaelle-jean-stay-on-as/). Globe and Mail. Archived (https://web.arch
     ive.org/web/20181009065544/https://www.theglobeandmail.com/politics/article-prime-minister-trude
     au-has-last-shot-to-help-michaelle-jean-stay-on-as/) from the original on 9 October 2018. Retrieved
     9 October 2018.
167. "Nagorno-Karabakh: The Crisis in the Caucasus" (https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/nagorno-karab
     akh-crisis-caucasus). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20060721165228/http://www.cfr.org/pu
     blication/9148/) from the original on 21 July 2006. Retrieved 4 May 2019.
168. "Armenia and Turkey sign peace deal" (https://web.archive.org/web/20091014080048/http://news.y
     ahoo.com/s/nm/20091010/ts_nm/us_turkey_armenia_9). Archived from the original (https://news.ya
     hoo.com/s/nm/20091010/ts_nm/us_turkey_armenia_9) on 14 October 2009.
169. Nona Mikhelidze (5 March 2010). "The Turkish-Armenian Rapprochement at the Deadlock" (https://
     www.iai.it/sites/default/files/iai1005.pdf) (PDF). IAI Istituto Affari Internazionali. p. 3. Archived (http
     s://web.archive.org/web/20180516101433/http://www.iai.it/sites/default/files/iai1005.pdf) (PDF) from
     the original on 16 May 2018. Retrieved 2 June 2020.
170. "Protocol on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the Republic of. Turkey and the
     Republic of Armenia" (http://www.mfa.gov.tr/site_media/html/zurih-protokolleri-en.pdf) (PDF).
     Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Turkey. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20200726083609/http://
     www.mfa.gov.tr/site_media/html/zurih-protokolleri-en.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 26 July 2020.
     Retrieved 2 June 2020.
171. "Relations between Turkey and Armenia" (http://www.mfa.gov.tr/relations-between-turkey-and-arme
     nia.en.mfa). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Turkey. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/202007260
     91256/http://www.mfa.gov.tr/relations-between-turkey-and-armenia.en.mfa) from the original on 26
     July 2020. Retrieved 2 June 2020.
172. "Baku and Moscow – 'One Hundred Percent Strategic Partners' " (https://web.archive.org/web/2016
     0701181240/http://hetq.am/eng/print/10037/). Hetq Online. 27 February 2006. Archived from the
     original (http://hetq.am/eng/print/10037/) on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2008.
173. "Ancestry Data" (https://www.census.gov). U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. Archived (https://web.archiv
     e.org/web/20180804222046/http://www.census.gov/) from the original on 4 August 2018. Retrieved
     22 July 2009. The 2001 Canadian Census (http://www12.statcan.ca/english/census01/products/hig
     hlight/ETO/Table1.cfm?Lang=E&T=501&GV=1&GID=0) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2013
     0409060848/http://www12.statcan.ca/english/census01/products/highlight/ETO/Table1.cfm?Lang=E
     &T=501&GV=1&GID=0) 9 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine determined that there are 40,505
     persons of Armenian ancestry currently living in Canada. However, these are liable to be low
     numbers, since people of mixed ancestry, very common in North America tend to be under-counted:
     the 1990 census US indicates (https://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/language/table5.txt)
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170724134730/https://www.census.gov/population/socde
     mo/language/table5.txt) 24 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine 149,694 people who speak the
     Armenian language at home. "The Armenian Embassy in Canada" (https://web.archive.org/web/200
     60826182306/http://www.armembassycanada.ca/diaspora/diaspora6.htm). Archived from the
     original (http://www.armembassycanada.ca/diaspora/diaspora6.htm) on 26 August 2006. Retrieved
     1 June 2016. estimates 1 million ethnic Armenians in the US and 100,000 in Canada. The Armenian
     Church of America makes a similar estimate (https://web.archive.org/web/20030202125735/http://w
     ww.armenianchurch.org/heritage/history/america.html). By all accounts, over half of the Armenians
     in the United States live in California.
174. European Parliament on the European Union's relations with the South Caucasus (https://www.euro
     parl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+REPORT+A5-2002-0028+0+DOC+XML+V
     0//EN&language=EN), archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20200702131223/https://www.europar
     l.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-%2F%2FEP%2F%2FTEXT+REPORT+A5-2002-0028+0+D
     OC+XML+V0%2F%2FEN&language=EN) from the original on 2 July 2020, retrieved 4 October
     2020
175. "RFE/RL Caucasus Report" (https://web.archive.org/web/20101120111039/http://armeniaforeignmi
     nistry.am/news/inthenews/050107_eu.html). Armenian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 7 January 2005.
     Archived from the original (http://www.armeniaforeignministry.am/news/inthenews/050107_eu.html)
     on 20 November 2010. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
176. "Interview with RA National Assembly Speaker Artur Baghdasaryan" (https://web.archive.org/web/2
     0090113164842/http://www.arminfo.am/political-issue22.html). ArmInfo News Agency. 26 October
     2005. Archived from the original (http://www.arminfo.am/political-issue22.html) on 13 January 2009.
     Retrieved 22 July 2009.
177. "Eurasian Economic Commission" (http://www.eurasiancommission.org/en/Pages/default.aspx).
     www.eurasiancommission.org. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20151008032729/http://www.
     eurasiancommission.org/en/Pages/default.aspx) from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved
     13 October 2015.
178. "ДОГОВОР О ПРИСОЕДИНЕНИИ РЕСПУБЛИКИ АРМЕНИЯ К ДОГОВОРУ О ЕВРАЗИЙСКОМ
     ЭКОНОМИЧЕСКОМ СОЮЗЕ ОТ 29 МАЯ 2014 ГОДА (Минск, 10 октября 2014 года)" (https://we
     b.archive.org/web/20141225011034/http://www.customs-code.ru/pravovbaza/18429-dogovor-arm).
     www.customs-code.ru. Archived from the original (http://www.customs-code.ru/pravovbaza/18429-d
     ogovor-arm) on 25 December 2014. Retrieved 13 October 2015.
179. "Armenia To Join Russian-Led Customs Union" (http://www.rferl.org/content/armenia-customs-unio
     n/25094560.html). Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 3 September 2013. Archived (https://web.archi
     ve.org/web/20130913013339/http://www.rferl.org/content/armenia-customs-union/25094560.html)
     from the original on 13 September 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2013.
180. "New agreement signed between the European Union and Armenia set to bring tangible benefits to
     citizens" (https://eeas.europa.eu/headquarters/headquarters-homepage/36141/new-agreement-sig
     ned-between-european-union-and-armenia-set-bring-tangible-benefits-citizens_en). EEAS.
     European Commission. 24 November 2017. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2018011614094
     3/https://eeas.europa.eu/headquarters/headquarters-homepage/36141/new-agreement-signed-bet
     ween-european-union-and-armenia-set-bring-tangible-benefits-citizens_en) from the original on 16
     January 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2018.
181. "Joint Proposal for a Council Decision on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the
     Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the
     European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of
     Armenia, of the other part" (https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52017JC0
     037). EUR-Lex. 25 September 2017. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20191205075846/http
     s://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52017JC0037) from the original on 5
     December 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2020.
182. "EU and Armenia take stock on Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement
     implementation" (https://web.archive.org/web/20200917004251/https://www.euneighbours.eu/en/ea
     st/stay-informed/news/eu-and-armenia-take-stock-comprehensive-and-enhanced-partnership-agree
     ment). EU Neighbours. 18 December 2019. Archived from the original (https://www.euneighbours.e
     u/en/east/stay-informed/news/eu-and-armenia-take-stock-comprehensive-and-enhanced-partnershi
     p-agreement) on 17 September 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2020.
183. Zahorka, Hans-Juergen. "How Armenia Could Approach the European Union" (https://web.archive.o
     rg/web/20080428045333/http://www.libertas-institut.com/de/PDF/Armenia%20ante%20portas.pdf)
     (PDF). Europäisches Institut GmbH. Archived from the original (http://www.libertas-institut.com/de/P
     DF/Armenia%20ante%20portas.pdf) (PDF) on 28 April 2008. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
184. "EU launches negotiations on Association Agreements with Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia" (htt
     p://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/10/955&format=HTML&aged=0&langua
     ge=EN&guiLanguage=en). Europa (web portal). 15 July 2010. Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
     b/20111204144048/http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP%2F10%2F955&f
     ormat=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en) from the original on 4 December 2011.
     Retrieved 21 September 2011.
185. "Armenia-EU association agreement may be concluded shortly | Armenia News" (https://web.archiv
     e.org/web/20111008143723/http://news.am/eng/news/22489.html). News.am. Archived from the
     original (http://news.am/eng/news/22489.html) on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 21 September 2011.
186. "3rd Plenary Round of the EU–Armenia Negotiation on the Association Agreement" (http://ec.europ
     a.eu/delegations/armenia/press_corner/all_news/news/2010/20101215_01_en.htm). Ec.europa.eu.
     15 December 2010. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20110511092533/http://ec.europa.eu/del
     egations/armenia/press_corner/all_news/news/2010/20101215_01_en.htm) from the original on 11
     May 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2012.
187. Gavin, Gabriel (23 February 2024). "Putin loses grip on member of his military alliance" (https://ww
     w.politico.eu/article/putins-military-alliance-loses-a-member/). Politico.eu. Archived (https://web.arch
     ive.org/web/20240407015217/https://www.politico.eu/article/putins-military-alliance-loses-a-membe
     r/) from the original on 7 April 2024. Retrieved 12 March 2024.
188. "Pashinyan warns of potential de jure freeze of Armenia's activities in CSTO if the current process
     continues" (https://armenpress.am/eng/news/1131379.html). Armenpress. 28 February 2024.
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240228183425/https://armenpress.am/eng/news/1131379.
     html) from the original on 28 February 2024. Retrieved 4 March 2024.
189. Leven, Denis (12 March 2024). "Armenia moves to expel Russian border guards from Yerevan's
     airport" (https://www.politico.eu/article/armenia-foreign-minister-ararat-mirzoyan-russia-border-guar
     ds-yerevan-zvartnots-airport/). Politico.eu. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240312195545/
     https://www.politico.eu/article/armenia-foreign-minister-ararat-mirzoyan-russia-border-guards-yerev
     an-zvartnots-airport/) from the original on 12 March 2024. Retrieved 12 March 2024.
190. "Armenia's bid for EU membership - Yerevan's shift away from Russia" (https://en.trend.az/scaucas
     us/armenia/3869381.html). trend.az. 2 March 2024. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2024031
     6145037/https://en.trend.az/scaucasus/armenia/3869381.html) from the original on 16 March 2024.
     Retrieved 12 March 2024.
191. "Will Armenia apply to become a candidate for EU membership in the coming days?" (https://radar.
     am/en/news/press-2618720505/). radar.am. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2024030401454
     0/https://radar.am/en/news/press-2618720505/) from the original on 4 March 2024. Retrieved
     12 March 2024.
192. "NIKOL PASHINYAN SAID THAT YOU SHOULD APPLY TO BECOME A CANDIDATE FOR EU
     MEMBERSHIP BEFORE AUTUMN AT THE LATEST" (https://hraparak.am/post/c1bb9ccbee31e8bf
     e4661e7849e99a75). hraparak.am. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240314123045/https://
     hraparak.am/post/c1bb9ccbee31e8bfe4661e7849e99a75) from the original on 14 March 2024.
     Retrieved 12 March 2024.
193. "Armenia mulling EU membership application, foreign minister says" (https://www.politico.eu/article/
     armenia-mulling-eu-membership-application-foreign-minister-mirzoyan-says/). politico.eu. 9 March
     2024. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240310172734/https://www.politico.eu/article/armeni
     a-mulling-eu-membership-application-foreign-minister-mirzoyan-says/) from the original on 10
     March 2024. Retrieved 12 March 2024.
194. "Armenia is considering seeking EU membership, foreign minister says" (https://www.euractiv.com/
     section/enlargement/news/armenia-is-considering-seeking-eu-membership-foreign-minister-says/).
     euractiv.com. 10 March 2024. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240310085810/https://www.
     euractiv.com/section/enlargement/news/armenia-is-considering-seeking-eu-membership-foreign-mi
     nister-says/) from the original on 10 March 2024. Retrieved 12 March 2024.
195. "The retreat of global democracy stopped in 2018" (https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2019/
     01/08/the-retreat-of-global-democracy-stopped-in-2018). The Economist. 8 January 2019.
     ISSN 0013-0613 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0013-0613). Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
     b/20190109053748/https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2019/01/08/the-retreat-of-global-dem
     ocracy-stopped-in-2018) from the original on 9 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019.
196. "Armenia" (https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2019/armenia). freedomhouse.org. 31
     January 2019. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190207015026/https://freedomhouse.org/re
     port/freedom-world/2019/armenia) from the original on 7 February 2019. Retrieved 6 February
     2019.
197. "Armenia" (https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2018/armenia). freedomhouse.org.
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180206073546/https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-w
     orld/2018/armenia) from the original on 6 February 2018. Retrieved 5 February 2018.
198. "Armenia : A revolution live-streamed | Reporters without borders" (https://rsf.org/en/armenia). RSF.
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160423152125/https://rsf.org/en/armenia) from the original
     on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2019.
199. "Armenia improves positions in World Press Freedom Index by 19 points: Pashinyan confident in
     continuation of progress" (https://armenpress.am/eng/news/971810/). armenpress.am. 18 April
     2019. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190418151639/https://armenpress.am/eng/news/97
     1810/) from the original on 18 April 2019. Retrieved 18 April 2019.
200. "The Human Freedom Index 2023" (https://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/2023-01/human-freedo
     m-index-2022.pdf) (PDF). Fraser Institute. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230622140033/
     https://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/2023-01/human-freedom-index-2022.pdf) (PDF) from the
     original on 22 June 2023. Retrieved 22 June 2023.
201. "COUNTRY PROFILES" (https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/human-freedom-index-files/2017
     -human-freedom-index-country-profiles.pdf) (PDF). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2018012
     6185410/https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/human-freedom-index-files/2017-human-freedom
     -index-country-profiles.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 26 January 2018.
202. "Human Freedom Index" (https://www.cato.org/human-freedom-index). Cato Institute. Archived (http
     s://web.archive.org/web/20180201014922/https://www.cato.org/human-freedom-index) from the
     original on 1 February 2018. Retrieved 26 January 2018.
203. "The Armenian Parliament ratified the Rome Statute. What was it necessary for?" (https://jam-news.
     net/armenia-ratified-the-rome-statute/). 3 October 2023. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2023
     1005024049/https://jam-news.net/armenia-ratified-the-rome-statute/) from the original on 5 October
     2023. Retrieved 3 October 2023.
204. "Regional Administration Bodies" (http://www.gov.am/en/regions/). The Government of the Republic
     of Armenia. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20120211012350/http://www.gov.am/en/regions)
     from the original on 11 February 2012. Retrieved 11 September 2008.
205. "Armstat:Provinces, area and population" (http://www.armstat.am/file/doc/99475033.pdf) (PDF).
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20171010144321/http://www.armstat.am/file/doc/99475033.p
     df) (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2014.
206. "The Main Results of RA Census 2022, trilingual / Armenian Statistical Service of Republic of
     Armenia" (https://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=82&id=2623). www.armstat.am. Retrieved 5 November
     2024. Cite error: The named reference "2022 Census" was defined multiple times with
     different content (see the help page).
207. Demourian, Avet (19 October 2007). "Armenian Eyes, Ears on US Genocide Vote" (https://www.wa
     shingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/10/19/AR2007101901471.html). The Washington
     Post. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20100425123241/http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-d
     yn/content/article/2007/10/19/AR2007101901471.html) from the original on 25 April 2010. Retrieved
     7 July 2009.
208. Z. Lerman and A. Mirzakhanian, Private Agriculture in Armenia, Lexington Books, Lanham, MD,
     2001.
209. Statistical Yearbook 2007 (http://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=179) Archived (https://web.archive.org/w
     eb/20081003060915/http://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=179) 3 October 2008 at the Wayback
     Machine, Armenia National Statistical Service, Yerevan
210. "Country Trends" (http://data.footprintnetwork.org/#/countryTrends?cn=1&type=BCpc,EFCpc).
     Global Footprint Network. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170808050235/http://data.footpri
     ntnetwork.org/#/countryTrends?cn=1&type=BCpc,EFCpc) from the original on 8 August 2017.
     Retrieved 24 June 2020.
211. Lin, David; Hanscom, Laurel; Murthy, Adeline; Galli, Alessandro; Evans, Mikel; Neill, Evan; Mancini,
     MariaSerena; Martindill, Jon; Medouar, FatimeZahra; Huang, Shiyu; Wackernagel, Mathis (2018).
     "Ecological Footprint Accounting for Countries: Updates and Results of the National Footprint
     Accounts, 2012-2018" (https://doi.org/10.3390%2Fresources7030058). Resources. 7 (3): 58.
     doi:10.3390/resources7030058 (https://doi.org/10.3390%2Fresources7030058).
212. Kiniry, Laura. "How Armenia Plans to Become the Next World-Class Hiking Destination" (https://ww
     w.smithsonianmag.com/travel/armenia-becoming-world-class-hiking-destination-180965096/).
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180205000848/https://www.smithsonianmag.com/travel/ar
     menia-becoming-world-class-hiking-destination-180965096/) from the original on 5 February 2018.
     Retrieved 4 February 2018.
213. "Unemployment Armenia" (http://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=126&id=08010). Armenian Statistical
     Service of Republic of Armenia. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160507095233/http://www.
     armstat.am/en/?id=08010&nid=126) from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2016.
214. "Index of Economic Freedom: Armenia" (https://web.archive.org/web/20210828191141/https://www.
     heritage.org/index/country/armenia). Heritage Organisation. Archived from the original (https://www.
     heritage.org/index/country/armenia) on 28 August 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
215. "The head of the Central Bank of Armenia hopes for economic growth at the end of the year by
     13%" (https://www.akm.ru/eng/news/the-head-of-the-central-bank-of-armenia-hopes-for-economic-
     growth-at-the-end-of-the-year-by-13/). AKM EN. 20 October 2022. Archived (https://web.archive.or
     g/web/20221027111907/https://www.akm.ru/eng/news/the-head-of-the-central-bank-of-armenia-hop
     es-for-economic-growth-at-the-end-of-the-year-by-13/) from the original on 27 October 2022.
     Retrieved 27 October 2022.
216. "IMF slashes forecast for Armenian economic growth for 2022" (https://www.intellinews.com/imf-sla
     shes-forecast-for-armenian-economic-growth-for-2022-238495/). www.intellinews.com. 18 March
     2022. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20221027111907/https://www.intellinews.com/imf-slas
     hes-forecast-for-armenian-economic-growth-for-2022-238495/) from the original on 27 October
     2022. Retrieved 27 October 2022.
217. Erocal, Deniz; Yegorov, Igor (2015). Countries in the Black Sea basin. In: UNESCO Science
     Report: towards 2030 (http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002354/235406e.pdf) (PDF). Paris:
     UNESCO. pp. 324–41. ISBN 978-92-3-100129-1. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201706300
     25557/http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002354/235406e.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 30
     June 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2017.
218. World Intellectual Property Organization (2024). "Global Innovation Index 2024. Unlocking the
     Promise of Social Entrepreneurship" (https://www.wipo.int/web-publications/global-innovation-index
     -2024/assets/67729/2000%20Global%20Innovation%20Index%202024_WEB2.pdf) (PDF).
     www.wipo.int. Geneva. p. 18. doi:10.34667/tind.50062 (https://doi.org/10.34667%2Ftind.50062).
     ISBN 978-92-805-3681-2. Retrieved 1 October 2024.
219. "The Main Results of RA Census 2022 / Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia" (https://w
     ww.armstat.am/en/?nid=82&id=2623). www.armstat.am. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/200
     80520030736/https://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=82&id=2623) from the original on 20 May 2008.
     Retrieved 1 February 2024.
220. "World Development Indicators – Google Public Data Explorer" (https://www.google.com/publicdat
     a/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&met_y=ny_gdp_mktp_cd&dl=en#!ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm
     =h&met_y=en_pop_dnst&scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim=region&idim=country:ARM:GEO:AZE:MD
     A:KAZ:BLR:EST:LVA:LTU:RUS:TJK:TKM:UKR:UZB&ifdim=region&tstart=319579200000&tend=145
     5652800000&dl=en&ind=false). www.google.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20201004
     180229/https://www.google.com/publicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&met_y=ny_gdp_mktp_cd&
     dl=en#!ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h&met_y=en_pop_dnst&scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim
     =region&idim=country:ARM:GEO:AZE:MDA:KAZ:BLR:EST:LVA:LTU:RUS:TJK:TKM:UKR:UZB&ifdi
     m=region&tstart=319579200000&tend=1455652800000&dl=en&ind=false) from the original on 4
     October 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2018.
221. Paul, Amanda. "Armenia's disappearing population" (https://web.archive.org/web/20110727030616/
     http://www.todayszaman.com/columnist-251720-armenias-disappearing-population.html). Archived
     from the original (http://www.todayszaman.com/columnist-251720-armenias-disappearing-populatio
     n.html) on 27 July 2011. Retrieved 27 July 2011.
222. "World Development Indicators – Google Public Data Explorer" (https://www.google.com/publicdat
     a/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&met_y=ny_gdp_mktp_cd&dl=en#!ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm
     =h&met_y=sp_pop_grow&scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim=region&idim=country:ARM&ifdim=region
     &tstart=319579200000&tend=1455652800000&dl=en&ind=false). www.google.com. Archived (http
     s://web.archive.org/web/20201004180235/https://www.google.com/publicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppj
     of8f9_&met_y=ny_gdp_mktp_cd&dl=en#!ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h&met_y=sp_pop_gr
     ow&scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim=region&idim=country:ARM&ifdim=region&tstart=319579200000
     &tend=1455652800000&dl=en&ind=false) from the original on 4 October 2020. Retrieved
     17 February 2018.
223. Turay, Anna. "Tarihte Ermeniler" (http://www.bolsohays.com/webac.asp?referans=1).
     Bolsohays:Istanbul Armenians Like many other ethnicities Armenians in India too have played a
     role historically and had an impact historically. Today however the community has been reduced to
     about a hundred living in Calcutta. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20080209171028/http://w
     ww.bolsohays.com/webac.asp?referans=1) from the original on 9 February 2008. Retrieved
     4 January 2007.
224. "Jerusalem – The Old City: The Armenian Quarter" (https://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Soci
     ety_&_Culture/geo/armenianq.html). Jewish Virtual Library. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
     0081121182041/http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Society_%26_Culture/geo/armenianq.ht
     ml) from the original on 21 November 2008. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
225. "San Lazzaro degli Armeni – Venice for Visitors" (http://europeforvisitors.com/venice/articles/san_la
     zzaro_degli_armeni.htm). Europeforvisitors.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201011220
     40326/http://europeforvisitors.com/venice/articles/san_lazzaro_degli_armeni.htm) from the original
     on 22 November 2010. Retrieved 30 December 2010.
226. "Nagorno-Karabakh almost empty as most of population flees to Armenia" (https://www.rfi.fr/en/euro
     pe/20230930-nagorno-karabakh-almost-empty-as-most-of-population-flees-to-armenia). Radio
     France Internationale. 30 September 2023. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2023100202025
     8/https://www.rfi.fr/en/europe/20230930-nagorno-karabakh-almost-empty-as-most-of-population-fle
     es-to-armenia) from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 30 September 2023.
227. "Population in Nagorno-Karabakh 2007" (https://web.archive.org/web/20100331153541/http://www.
     stat-nkr.am/2002_2007/0_2%20himcuc_6-10.pdf) (PDF). National Statistical Service of Nagorno-
     Karabakh Republic. Archived from the original (http://www.stat-nkr.am/2002_2007/0_2%20himcuc_
     6-10.pdf) (PDF) on 31 March 2010. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
228. Asatryan, Garnik; Arakelova, Victoria (2002). The Ethnic Minorities of Armenia. Routledge., part of
     the OSCE
229. "The Main Results of RA Census 2022" (https://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=82&id=2623). ArmStat.
     Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20080520030736/https://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=82&id=26
     23) from the original on 20 May 2008. Retrieved 1 February 2022.
230. "The Transcaucasian Soviet Federation" (https://books.google.com/books?id=fkHjAAAAMAAJ&pg=
     PA497). Russian Review. 3 (24). Washington, D.C.: The Russian Information Bureau: 498. 15
     December 1925. Retrieved 20 April 2022.
231. (in Russian) The All-Union Population Census of 1989 (http://demoscope.ru/weekly/ssp/sng_nac_8
     9.php?reg=13) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20120104081804/http://demoscope.ru/weekl
     y/ssp/sng_nac_89.php?reg=13) 4 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Demoscope.ru
232. "New Index Shows Least-, Most-Accepting Countries for Migrants" (http://news.gallup.com/poll/216
     377/new-index-shows-least-accepting-countries-migrants.aspx?g_source=link_newsv9&g_campaig
     n=item_224375&g_medium=copy). Gallup.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2018011917
     5602/http://news.gallup.com/poll/216377/new-index-shows-least-accepting-countries-migrants.asp
     x?g_source=link_newsv9&g_campaign=item_224375&g_medium=copy) from the original on 19
     January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018.
233. Charles Dowsett, E. Peters. Sayat'-Nova. An 18th-century Troubadour: a Biographical and Literary
     Study. Peeters Publishers, 1997 ISBN 90-6831-795-4; p. xv
234. Hacikyan, Agop Jack; Basmajian, Gabriel; Franchuk, Edward S.; Ouzounian, Nourhan (2000). The
     Heritage of Armenian Literature: From the Oral Tradition to the Golden Age. Detroit: Wayne State
     University Press. p. 91 (https://books.google.com/books?id=uvA-oV0alP8C&pg=PA91).
     ISBN 9780814328156.
235. "The South Caucasus Between The EU and the Eurasian Union" (https://web.archive.org/web/2013
     1029210003/http://www.css.ethz.ch/publications/pdfs/CAD-51-52.pdf) (PDF). Caucasus Analytical
     Digest #51–52. Forschungsstelle Osteuropa, Bremen and Center for Security Studies, Zürich. 17
     June 2013. pp. 22–23. ISSN 1867-9323 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1867-9323). Archived from
     the original (http://www.css.ethz.ch/publications/pdfs/CAD-51-52.pdf) (PDF) on 29 October 2013.
     Retrieved 3 July 2013.
236. "Armenia – Which Nation First Adopted Christianity?" (http://ancienthistory.about.com/od/neareast/f/
     1stchristian.htm). Ancienthistory.about.com. 29 October 2009. Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
     b/20120918080327/http://ancienthistory.about.com/od/neareast/f/1stchristian.htm) from the original
     on 18 September 2012. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
237. "Visit Armenia, It is Beautiful" (https://web.archive.org/web/20100328005031/http://www.visitarmeni
     a.org/). Visitarmenia.org. Archived from the original (http://www.visitarmenia.org/) on 28 March
     2010. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
238. "Armenia Information – Welcome to Armenia" (https://web.archive.org/web/20100206222352/http://
     www.welcomearmenia.com/main.php?page=armeniainformation&sid=104&lang=eng).
     Welcomearmenia.com. Archived from the original (http://www.welcomearmenia.com/main.php?pag
     e=armeniainformation&sid=104&lang=eng) on 6 February 2010. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
239. "Armenian Census 2011" (http://armstat.am/file/article/sv_03_13a_520.pdf) (PDF) (in Armenian).
     p. 7. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20181121025510/https://www.armstat.am/file/article/sv_
     03_13a_520.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 21 November 2018. Retrieved 25 October 2015.
240. "CIA – The World Factbook – Armenia" (https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/armenia/).
     Cia.gov. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210104184358/https://www.cia.gov/the-world-fact
     book/countries/armenia/) from the original on 4 January 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020.
241. "Armenian Brotherhood Church of Yerevan" (http://abcy.org/). Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
     b/20140331181252/http://abcy.org/) from the original on 31 March 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2014.
242. "Armenian Evangelical Christian Baptist" (https://web.archive.org/web/20070825192643/http://www.
     armbaplife.am/). Armbaplife.am. Archived from the original (http://armbaplife.am/) on 25 August
     2007. Retrieved 28 August 2012.
243. "Despite poverty, Baptists prosper in Armenia" (https://web.archive.org/web/20081119232701/http://
     www.goodnewsadvertising.com/biblical_recorder.pdf) (PDF). Biblical Recorder. Baptist State
     convention of North Carolina. 17 July 2004. Archived from the original (http://goodnewsadvertising.c
     om/biblical_recorder.pdf) (PDF) on 19 November 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2010.
244. "Armenian Presbyterian Church to Commemorate 1700th Anniversary of Christianity in Armenia
     with Concert and Khachkar Dedication" (https://web.archive.org/web/20110510012451/http://www.h
     ighbeam.com/doc/1P1-79125406.html). The Armenian Reporter. 20 October 2001. Archived from
     the original (http://highbeam.com/doc/1P1-79125406.html) on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 21 May
     2011.
245. Lane, Christel (1978). Christian religion in the Soviet Union: a sociological study (https://archive.org/
     details/christianreligio0000lane_y2b9). Albany: State univ. of New York P. p. 107 (https://archive.or
     g/details/christianreligio0000lane_y2b9/page/107). ISBN 978-0-87395-327-6. Retrieved 27 August
     2015.
246. "The Ethnic Minorities of Armenia" (http://www.minorities-network.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/
     The-ethnic-minorities-of-Armenia.pdf) (PDF). Yerevan. 2002. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/
     20190819163826/http://www.minorities-network.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/The-ethnic-minorit
     ies-of-Armenia.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 19 August 2019. Retrieved 27 January 2021.
247. Bardi, Ariel Sophia (11 November 2019). "Inside the world's biggest Yazidi temple in Armenia" (http
     s://www.aljazeera.com/features/2019/11/11/inside-the-worlds-biggest-yazidi-temple-in-armenia). Al
     Jazeera. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220327081635/https://www.aljazeera.com/feature
     s/2019/11/11/inside-the-worlds-biggest-yazidi-temple-in-armenia) from the original on 27 March
     2022. Retrieved 27 March 2022.
248. Badalian, Susan (13 May 2019). "Minister Cautious About Corruption in Healthcare" (https://www.az
     atutyun.am/a/29938027.html). «Ազատ Եվրոպա/Ազատություն» Ռադիոկայան. Archived (htt
     ps://web.archive.org/web/20230331155524/https://www.azatutyun.am/a/29938027.html) from the
     original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023.
249. "Armenia's Basic Benefits Package and Universal Health Insurance Systems" (https://evnreport.co
     m/magazine-issues/armenia-s-basic-benefits-package-and-universal-health-insurance-systems/).
     29 November 2021. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230324153438/https://evnreport.com/
     magazine-issues/armenia-s-basic-benefits-package-and-universal-health-insurance-systems/) from
     the original on 24 March 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023.
250. "Armenia to introduce free healthcare for the under-18s" (https://emerging-europe.com/news/armen
     ia-to-introduce-free-healthcare-for-the-under-18s/). 27 June 2019. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
     web/20200627220218/https://emerging-europe.com/news/armenia-to-introduce-free-healthcare-for-
     the-under-18s/) from the original on 27 June 2020. Retrieved 2 January 2023.
251. "Chart – World Development Indicators (Google Public Data Explorer)" (https://www.google.com/pu
     blicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h&met_y=sp_dyn_cbrt_in
     &scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim=region&idim=country:ARM&idim=region:ECS&ifdim=region&hl=en
     &dl=en&ind=false). www.google.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190904234224/htt
     p://www.google.com/publicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_) from the original on 4 September
     2019. Retrieved 24 February 2018.
252. "Chart – World Development Indicators (Google Public Data Explorer)" (https://www.google.com/pu
     blicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h&met_y=sp_dyn_cdrt_in
     &scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim=region&idim=country:ARM&idim=region:ECS&ifdim=region&hl=en
     &dl=en&ind=false). www.google.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190904234224/htt
     p://www.google.com/publicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_) from the original on 4 September
     2019. Retrieved 24 February 2018.
253. "Chart – World Development Indicators (Google Public Data Explorer)" (https://www.google.com/pu
     blicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&ctype=c&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h&met_y=sp_dyn_le00_i
     n&scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&idim=country:ARM:GEO:BLR:LVA:LTU:RUS:AZE:KAZ:MDA:TJK:TKM:
     UZB:EST:UKR:KGZ&ifdim=country:region:ECS&tunit=Y&pit=1424721600000&hl=en&dl=en&ind=fa
     lse&icfg). www.google.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190904234224/http://www.goo
     gle.com/publicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_) from the original on 4 September 2019. Retrieved
     24 February 2018.
254. Curtis, Glenn E. and Ronald G. Suny. "Education". Armenia: A Country Study (http://lcweb2.loc.gov/
     frd/cs/amtoc.html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090912060405/http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/
     cs/amtoc.html) 12 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Library of Congress Federal
     Research Division (March 1994). This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the
     public domain.
255. "About us" (http://araratbaccalaureate.am/en/about-us). araratbaccalaureate.am. Archived (https://w
     eb.archive.org/web/20180202130722/http://araratbaccalaureate.am/en/about-us) from the original
     on 2 February 2018. Retrieved 2 February 2018.
256. "The Araratian Baccalaureate: A guide for universities" (https://foundation.ayb.am/frontend/images/c
     k/files/Armenia%20Araratian%20Baccalaureate%20Briefing.pdf) (PDF). Archived (https://web.archi
     ve.org/web/20201004180225/https://foundation.ayb.am/frontend/images/ck/files/Armenia%20Ararat
     ian%20Baccalaureate%20Briefing.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 4 October 2020. Retrieved
     2 February 2018.
257. "Chart – World Development Indicators (Google Public Data Explorer)" (https://www.google.com/pu
     blicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h&met_y=school_enrollm
     ent&fdim_y=education_level:4&fdim_y=gross_net:1&scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim=region&idim=r
     egion:ECS&idim=country:ARM:GEO:AZE&ifdim=region&tstart=888264000000&tend=14247216000
     00&dl=en&ind=false). www.google.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20200726124548/htt
     ps://www.google.com/publicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h
     &met_y=school_enrollment&fdim_y=education_level:4&fdim_y=gross_net:1&scale_y=lin&ind_y=fal
     se&rdim=region&idim=region:ECS&idim=country:ARM:GEO:AZE&ifdim=region&tstart=8882640000
     00&tend=1424721600000&dl=en&ind=false) from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved
     24 February 2018.
258. "Chart – World Development Indicators (Google Public Data Explorer)" (https://www.google.com/pu
     blicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&ctype=l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h&met_y=expenditure_pe
     r_student&fdim_y=education_level:4&scale_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim=region&idim=region:ECS&idi
     m=country:ARM:RUS:LVA:AZE:BLR:EST:GEO:KAZ:KGZ:MDA:TJK:UKR&ifdim=region&tstart=8882
     64000000&tend=1424721600000&dl=en&ind=false). www.google.com. Archived (https://web.archiv
     e.org/web/20200726124539/https://www.google.com/publicdata/explore?ds=d5bncppjof8f9_&ctype
     =l&strail=false&bcs=d&nselm=h&met_y=expenditure_per_student&fdim_y=education_level:4&scal
     e_y=lin&ind_y=false&rdim=region&idim=region:ECS&idim=country:ARM:RUS:LVA:AZE:BLR:EST:G
     EO:KAZ:KGZ:MDA:TJK:UKR&ifdim=region&tstart=888264000000&tend=1424721600000&dl=en&i
     nd=false) from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 24 February 2018.
259. "Arts of Armenia (Architecture)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20150215053413/http://armenianstudi
     es.csufresno.edu:80/arts_of_armenia/architecture.htm). armenianstudies.csufresno.edu. Archived
     from the original (http://armenianstudies.csufresno.edu/arts_of_armenia/architecture.htm) on 15
     February 2015.
260. "Legislation: National Assembly of Armenia" (http://www.parliament.am/legislation.php?sel=show&I
     D=4717). Parliament.am. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20150701073128/http://www.parlia
     ment.am/legislation.php?sel=show&ID=4717) from the original on 1 July 2015. Retrieved 26 April
     2013.
261. "2020 Press Freedom report" (https://rsf.org/en/armenia). Reporters Without Borders. 14 October
     2020. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160423152125/https://rsf.org/en/armenia) from the
     original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2019.
262. Stefes, C.; Paturyan, Yevgenya J. (25 August 2021). "After the Revolution: State, Civil Society, and
     Democratization in Armenia and Georgia" (https://doi.org/10.3389%2Ffpos.2021.719478). Frontiers
     in Political Science. 3. doi:10.3389/fpos.2021.719478 (https://doi.org/10.3389%2Ffpos.2021.71947
     8).
263. "Concern about judicial harassment of Armenia's media" (https://rsf.org/en/news/concern-about-judi
     cial-harassment-armenias-media) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20201014133054/https://rs
     f.org/en/news/concern-about-judicial-harassment-armenias-media) 14 October 2020 at the
     Wayback Machine. Reporters Without Borders. February 18, 2020.
264. Armenian Cinema 100, by Artsvi Bakhchinyan, Yerevan, 2012, pp. 111–112
265. "Ambassadors in Sport?: Independent Armenia far below the glory of Soviet times on the pitch,
     mat" (https://www.armenianow.com/features/6903/ambassadors_in_sport_independent).
     ArmeniaNow. 15 December 2006. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180128074613/https://w
     ww.armenianow.com/features/6903/ambassadors_in_sport_independent) from the original on 28
     January 2018. Retrieved 27 January 2018.
266. "Inter Milan sign Mkhitaryan on free transfer" (https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/62021631). BBC
     Sport. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230929104838/https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/6
     2021631) from the original on 29 September 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023.
267. Thomas A. Green, ed. (2001). Martial arts of the world: en encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, Calif.:
     ABC-CLIO. p. 718 (https://books.google.com/books?id=v32oHSE5t6cC&pg=PA718). ISBN 978-1-
     57607-150-2.
268. "Armenia: the cleverest nation on earth" (https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p004j7zg). BBC World
     Service. 18 October 2009. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20171024030523/http://www.bbc.
     co.uk/programmes/p004j7zg) from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2018.
Sources
    Canard, Marius & Cahen, Claude (1960). "Armīniya" (https://doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_islam_CO
    M_0064). In Gibb, H. A. R.; Kramers, J. H.; Lévi-Provençal, E.; Schacht, J.; Lewis, B. & Pellat, Ch.
    (eds.). The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Volume I: A–B. Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp. 634–640.
    OCLC 495469456 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/495469456).


External links
    Armenia (https://x.com/armenia) on Twitter
    Armenia (https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/armenia/). The World Factbook. Central
    Intelligence Agency.
       Wikimedia Atlas of Armenia
    Key Development Forecasts for Armenia (http://www.ifs.du.edu/ifs/frm_CountryProfile.aspx?Countr
    y=AM) from International Futures
    Armeniapedia.org (http://www.armeniapedia.org/wiki/Main_Page)
    Armenia profile (https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-17398605) from the BBC News
    Armenia Stock Exchange (https://amx.am)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Armenia&oldid=1258320413"
